Welcome to the Jeremy’s IT Lab CCNA mega lab.
In this lab, we’ll cover every configuration
topic you need to know for the CCNA exam.
Just a warning: this lab is intense.
If you’ve studied all of the exam topics
and are getting ready to take on the CCNA
exam itself, you’ve come to the right place.
Now, we won’t cover every single configuration
command you should know, but we will cover
all configuration topics on the CCNA exam.
IPv4 and IPv6, static routes, VLANs, spanning
tree, OSPF, EtherChannel, DHCP, DNS, NAT,
SSH, security features, wireless, and more
– everything!
If you want to dive deeper into any particular
topic, such as specific OSPF configurations,
you can check out the relevant videos in my
CCNA course, or the relevant chapter in my
CCNA book.
The point of this lab is to tie everything
together, instead of focusing on each individual
technology or protocol in detail.
And the point of this video is to demonstrate
the correct solution to this lab, rather than
to explain the details of each concept again.
You may notice that this lab file isn’t
a typical .pkt Packet Tracer file.
It’s a .pka, Packet Tracer activity, file.
Pka files include automated grading, so after
you complete the lab, you can click Check
Results here to see if you configured everything
correctly.
Now, by default, the instructions here are
a separate window like this, but I’ll click
‘Dock’ here to dock them into the same
window as the lab topology, so we can easily
see the instructions as we go through the
lab.
The network topology for this lab is a three-tier
LAN consisting of two offices, Office A on
the left and Office B on the right.
The two offices are connected via a core layer,
and R1 provides Internet access with two redundant
connections.
If you click on the Internet here, you can
see it simply consists of two routers that
I have labeled ISP A and ISP B. You don’t
have to worry about these routers for this
lab; you only need to configure the network
from the perspective of the customer of these
ISPs – the enterprise connected to the Internet.
So, click on this back arrow here to return
to the rest of the network.
So, before diving in let’s read the lab
introduction here.
It says this comprehensive lab covers all
configuration topics on the CCNA exam.
Proceed through the steps in order and click
Check Results when you are done to check your
configurations.
So, as you can see here this is page 1 of
10.
You can click next to go through the different
pages to see the different steps.
But there is an important note here that says
You must save the device configurations, for
example with the COPY RUNNING-CONFIG STARTUP-CONFIG
command, or you will receive no points.
The grading system for most of this lab checks
the startup-config of each device to make
sure it matches the one I prepared beforehand,
so make sure to save each device’s configuration
or you won’t get points.
And finally, at the bottom it says this lab
is quite extensive, so you should set aside
at least a couple of hours to finish all of
it.
Here at the start of this video I have no
idea how long the video itself will be, but
I do know it’s going to be the longest video
I’ve ever made.
So, enough talking, I’ll click on Next to
begin part 1 of this lab, which is Initial
Setup.
So, we’re going to configure four main things
in this section: in step 1 we’ll configure
the hostname of each router and switch.
In step 2, we’ll configure an enable secret
to protect access to privileged exec mode.
In step 3, we’ll configure a user account.
And then in step 4 we’ll configure the console
line of each device.
So, let’s start with step 1, configuring
hostnames.
I’ll open the CLI of R1.
Now, recording this video on a single screen
is a bit of a challenge.
Ideally, I’d like to show the instructions,
the topology, and the CLI all at once, but
there’s just not enough real estate on the
screen.
So, I’ve prioritized making the CLI larger
so you can see all of the configurations easily.
I’ll show the instructions in between each
step, but while we’re doing the configurations
you won’t be able to see them.
So, first I’ll use ENABLE to enter privileged
EXEC mode here on R1.
Then CONF T to enter global config mode.
And then HOSTNAME R1 to configure the router’s
hostname.
The hostnames must match what’s shown in
the diagram here.
Okay, I configured R1’s hostname, but if
I look at the lab instructions, notice that
the completion rate is still 0%.
That’s because the evaluation is checking
the device’s startup-config, but the command
I just entered only changed the running-config.
To copy that configuration to the startup-config,
I’ll use DO WRITE, but you could also use
WRITE MEMORY or COPY RUNNING-CONFIG STARTUP-CONFIG;
all three commands have the same effect.
Then go back to check the completion score
again, and now we’re at 1%.
Because you have to configure many hundreds
of commands in this lab, don’t expect the
completion score to increase after every single
new command you configure.
However, as you go through the lab, I recommend
saving the device configurations and checking
that the score is increasing as you proceed.
Now I’ll configure the hostnames of the
core, distribution, and access switches.
For the sake of completeness, I will show
all of these configurations in this video,
but feel free to skip ahead if you don’t
want to watch these repetitive commands.
So, I’ll open up CSW1.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME CSW1.
And I’ll save the configuration with DO
WRITE.
Next, CSW2.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME CSW2.
And save the config with DO WRITE.
Next up we have the distribution switches:
DSW-A1 and A2, and DSW-B1 and B2.
I’ll start with DSW-A1.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME DSW-A1.
DO WRITE.
Then DSW-A2.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME DSW-A2.
DO WRITE.
Next, in Office B, DSW-B1.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME DSW-B1.
DO WRITE.
Finally, DSW-B2.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME DSW-B2.
DO WRITE.
Finally, the same deal on the access switches,
starting with ASW-A1.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME ASW-A1.
And save the config with DO WRITE.
Then ASW-A2.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME ASW-A2.
DO WRITE.
Then A3.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME ASW-A3.
DO WRITE.
Then move on to office B, starting with ASW-B1.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME ASW-B1.
DO WRITE.
Then B2.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME ASW-B2.
DO WRITE.
Finally, B3.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME ASW-B3.
DO WRITE.
Okay, let’s take a look at the instructions
again.
Take a look at the completion score: it’s
increased a lot already.
Don’t get too excited – we’re just getting
started.
When the lab first starts, the devices all
have no startup-config, so there’s nothing
to evaluate.
But when you first save the configs, various
default configurations like interface names
are saved to the startup-config; that’s
why the score jumps up after just configuring
the host names and saving the configs.
From now on I won’t save the configs after
every single step; I’ll just save them after
each section of the lab to show how the score
increases as we progress.
Now let’s look at steps 2, 3, and 4 together.
Step 2 says to configure the enable secret
‘jeremysitlab’ on each router and switch.
It also says to use type 9 hashing if available,
or type 5 if type 9 isn’t available.
Let’s hop on R1 again to demonstrate.
From global config mode, type ENABLE and then
a question mark to view the IOS context-sensitive
help.
So, the options are PASSWORD and SECRET.
Now let’s go to a different device, CSW1,
and see the options.
Again, type ENABLE and a question mark to
see the options.
Notice there is a third option: ALGORITHM-TYPE.
This lets you specify the hashing algorithm
that is used to hide the enable secret in
the config.
I cover this command in my book ‘Acing the
CCNA Exam’, but I haven’t covered it in
my video course, so you might not be aware
of it.
At some point I’ll update the course and
include it.
Anyway, in Packet Tracer, these core and distribution
switches, which are Cisco Catalyst 3650 switches,
support this command, and you can use type
9 hashing on them.
But the other devices, including R1 and all
of the access switches, don’t support the
command.
They only support type 5 hashing, which is
MD5.
So, I’ll return to R1.
Configure the enable secret with ENABLE SECRET
jeremysitlab.
And then check with DO SHOW RUN, use the pipe
(|) to filter the output, then ‘include
secret’.
As you can see, the secret is hashed using
type 5, which is MD5.
And then on CSW1, I’ll do ENABLE ALGORITHM-TYPE,
and then use a question mark again.
It has the ‘scrypt’ option; this is type
9 hashing, it uses the scrypt hashing algorithm.
So, let’s finish the command.
ENABLE ALGORITHM-TYPE SCRYPT SECRET jeremysitlab.
And let’s check.
DO SHOW RUN | INCLUDE secret.
So, as this number 9 indicates before the
hash, the secret was hashed using the type
9 algorithm, scrypt.
So, we’ll configure type 9 hashing on the
core and distribution switches, and type 5
on R1 and the access switches.
But before we do that, let’s check out steps
3 and 4.
Step 3 says to configure the user account
‘cisco’ with the secret ‘ccna’ on
each device.
And it says the same thing about hashing:
type 9 if available, and type 5 if not.
Just like the enable secret, in Packet Tracer
these multilayer switches in the core and
distribution layer support type 9, but R1
and the access switches only support type
5.
Once again, let me demonstrate that in the
CLI, on R1 first.
First type USERNAME, then the username ‘cisco’,
and then use the question mark.
There is no option for ALGORITHM-TYPE, so
I’ll just type SECRET and then the password
‘ccna’.
Let’s check again with DO SHOW RUN | INCLUDE
secret.
Like the enable secret, this user account’s
secret was hashed with MD5, which is type
5 in IOS.
Now let’s compare that with CSW1.
First, type USERNAME cisco, and then use the
question mark.
This one has the ALGORITHM-TYPE option, so
I’ll type that, followed by SCRYPT, then
SECRET, and then the secret ‘ccna’.
And let’s check.
DO SHOW RUN | INCLUDE secret.
So, both the enable secret and this account’s
secret were hashed with the scrypt, algorithm,
which is type 9 in IOS.
So, on these multilayer switches in the core
and distribution layers we’ll use type 9,
and on R1 and the access switches we’ll
use type 5.
But before doing that let’s finally take
a look at step 4.
Step 4 says to configure the console line
to require login with a local user account,
set a 30-minute inactivity timeout, and enable
synchronous logging.
So, that requires 3 configuration commands,
and these will be the same on all of the devices.
I’ll show them on R1 first.
First, use LINE CONSOLE 0 to configure the
console line – there’s only one.
The first instruction was to require login
with a local user account.
The command to enable that is LOGIN LOCAL.
Now, when someone connects to the device console
port, they will have to log in using a user
account on the device, such as the ‘cisco’
account we just created.
The next instruction was to set a 30-minute
inactivity timeout, meaning that the user
will be logged out after 30 minutes of inactivity.
I’ll use the question mark, and here you
can see the command.
EXEC-TIMEOUT.
Type the command, and then the time in minutes,
so 30.
You can also specify seconds after, for example
30 minutes and 30 seconds, but we don’t
need to in this case.
Finally, we should enable synchronous logging.
The command for that is LOGGING SYNCHRONOUS.
With that enabled, if a Syslog message appears
while I’m in the middle of writing a command,
the command will be re-printed on a new line,
making it easier to see the command I’m
typing; it won’t be cut off by the log message.
Okay, I’ve finished steps 2, 3, and 4 on
R1, so I’ll use DO WRITE to save and EXIT
to return to global config mode.
Now, for the rest of the devices, I’m simply
going to copy and paste the commands.
When you’re doing large labs like this that
require configuring the same commands on many
devices, this is a great technique to speed
things up and also avoid typos and misconfigurations.
So, I’ve prepared the commands in a text
file, but I won’t include it in the lab
files.
When you do the lab, you can either type the
commands directly into the CLI, or you can
do what I did: prepare the commands in a text
file like this, and then copy and paste them
into the CLI.
So, at the top here are the commands for R1
and the access switches.
The enable secret, the user account, and the
console line configurations.
I’m going to copy them with Ctrl-C, and
then paste them into the access switches,
since I already configured R1.
Let’s do it on ASW-A1 first.
To paste commands in Packet Tracer, right
click in the terminal and then click on Paste.
There we go, all of the commands were pasted
in.
Finally, I’ll just save the config with
DO WRITE and return to global config mode
with EXIT.
Next, ASW-A2.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE, and EXIT.
Then A3.
Now move on to Office B. ASW-B1 first.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE, and EXIT.
Then B2.
And finally ASW-B3.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE, and EXIT.
So, R1 and the access switches are done.
Now let’s take a look at that notepad again
and scroll down.
These switches in Packet Tracer support type
9 hashing for the enable secret and user accounts,
so we’ll use those commands that I showed
before on CSW1, and also configure the console
line.
So, highlight and copy all of these commands,
and let’s go on CSW1.
We already configured the enable secret and
user account here, but not the console line.
I’ll just paste all of the commands in anyway.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE, and EXIT to
return to global config mode.
Next up, CSW2.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE, and EXIT.
Then the distribution switches, DSW-A1 first.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE, EXIT.
Then DSW-A2.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE, and EXIT.
DSW-B1 next.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE, EXIT.
And finally, DSW-B2.
Okay, we’ve finished part 1.
Notice that the completion score has increased
a few points.
Still a long way to go, so let’s click Next
to go to part 2.
Part 2 covers VLAN and Layer-2 EtherChannel
configurations.
So, we’ll be focusing on the distribution
and access switches in this part.
First, let’s quickly look at the instructions.
Step 1 says to configure a Layer-2 EtherChannel
between DSW-A1 and A2 in Office A using a
Cisco-proprietary protocol, and step 2 says
the same for DSW-B1 and B2, but says to use
an open standard protocol.
So, a Cisco-proprietary protocol means we’ll
configure PAgP, Port Aggregation Protocol,
between DSW-A1 and A2, and an open standard
protocol means we’ll configure LACP, Link
Aggregation Control Protocol, between DSW-B1
and B2.
Okay, step 3 then says to configure all links
between access and distribution switches,
including the EtherChannels, as trunks.
So, all of these links here should be trunks.
In Step 4, we’ll configure VTP on these
switches so they can sync their VLAN databases
automatically.
Then, in steps 5 and 6 we’ll create the
appropriate VLANs in Office A and Office B.
And in steps 7 and 8 we’ll configure each
access switch’s interfaces connecting to
end hosts, and finally in step 9 disable unused
ports.
So, that’s part 2, focused on various Layer-2
concepts.
Let’s start by configuring those EtherChannels.
First, I’ll do step 1, focusing on DSW-A1
and A2.
We already established that we’ll configure
this one using the Cisco-proprietary PAgP,
but notice also that it says both switches
should actively try to form an EtherChannel.
PAgP has two modes: desirable and auto.
This means we should configure both sides
to use the desirable mode, which actively
tries to form an EtherChannel.
Auto mode will form an EtherChannel with a
neighbor in desirable mode, but doesn’t
try to form an EtherChannel itself.
So, I’ll go on DSW-A1 first.
Now, there are no interface labels on these
devices.
To see them, you can turn on interface labels
in Packet Tracer’s settings.
Or you can look at the spreadsheet that I
included in the lab files – it lists all
of the connections between devices.
You can get the lab files at this URL: jitl.jp/mega-lab.
But the best method is to practice your CLI
skills and use DO SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
In the output of this command, you can see
that DSW-A1 is connected to DSW-A2 via its
G1/0/4 and G1/0/5 interfaces.
The ‘Local Interface’ column lists the
interface on this switch, DSW-A1.
And on the final column on the right, you
can see that the same interfaces are used
on DSW-A2: G1/0/4 and G1/0/5.
So, I’ll use INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/4-5 to
configure both interfaces at the same time.
Then, just use CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE DESIRABLE
to configure these interfaces as part of PortChannel1.
Now, how do you know which group number to
use?
Look carefully at the lab instructions: it
says ‘configure a Layer-2 EtherChannel named
‘PortChannel1’.
This number, the port channel number, is the
group number.
Make sure to pay close attention to these
instructions.
If you use a different group number, it won’t
be marked correctly when you click on Check
Results at the end of the lab.
Okay, now let’s do the same on DSW-A2.
INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/4-5.
CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE DESIRABLE.
And just to make sure I’ll check its status
with DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY.
So, here’s PortChannel1.
It has the flags S and U, meaning Layer2 and
in use, so that’s good.
And the member ports both have the flag P,
meaning in port-channel.
So, everything looks good.
Next, let’s configure the EtherChannel between
DSW-B1 and B2.
LACP has two modes: active, which is like
PAgP’s desirable mode, and passive, which
is like PAgP’s auto mode.
Like step 1, step 2 says that both switches
should actively try to form an EtherChannel,
so we’ll use active mode.
So, let’s go on DSW-B1.
Like the Office A switches, these two are
connected via G1/0/4 and 5, so INTERFACE RANGE
G1/0/4-5.
Then, CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE ACTIVE.
That’s it.
I’ll do the same on DSW-B2.
INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/4-5.
CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE ACTIVE.
And just to make sure it’s okay I’ll check
with DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY.
So, we see the SU flags on the port-channel
interface, and the P flag on the physical
interfaces, so all’s good.
Now let’s move on to step 3, which says
to configure all links between access and
distribution switches, including the EtherChannels,
as trunks.
There are a few requirements.
First, it says to explicitly disable DTP on
all ports.
We’ll use SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE for that.
Then, it says to set each trunk’s native
VLAN to VLAN 1000, which is unused.
That’s a good security measure; the native
VLAN can make the LAN vulnerable to VLAN-hopping
attacks.
Then, we should allow VLANs 10, 20, 40, and
99 on all trunks in Office A, and allow VLANs
10, 20, 30, and 99 on all trunks in Office
B. When we configure the VLANs later, we’ll
see the purpose of each of those VLANs.
For now, just make sure to assign the correct
VLAN numbers.
Okay, first let’s focus on Office A. On
each distribution switch, we need to configure
these three links to the access switches as
trunks, as well as the port channel between
the distribution switches.
So, I’ll hop on DSW-A1.
First, let’s confirm the correct interfaces
with DO SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
So, ASW-A1, A2, and A3 are connected to this
switch’s G1/0/1, 1/0/2, and 1/0/3 interfaces.
So, let’s configure those interfaces as
trunks.
INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/1-3.
First, use SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK to make the
interfaces trunks.
Now, the instructions said to explicitly disable
DTP on the ports.
Even when manually configured in trunk or
access mode, DTP is still technically enabled,
so let’s disable DTP with SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE.
Next, I’ll set the native VLAN with SWITCHPORT
TRUNK NATIVE VLAN 1000.
Finally, set the allowed VLANs.
This is Office A, so I’ll use SWITCHPORT
TRUNK ALLOWED VLAN 10,20,40,99.
Next, I’ll use the same commands on PortChannel1.
INTERFACE PORT-CHANNEL1.
SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE.
SWITCHPORT TRUNK NATIVE VLAN 1000.
And SWITCHPORT TRUNK ALLOWED VLAN 10,20,40,99.
And then EXIT.
Okay, we’re done configuring DSW-A1.
These commands will be similar on most switches,
so I’ll just copy and paste the commands
on the others.
Let me open up the notepad I prepared and
scroll down to Part 2, Step 3.
First, I’ll copy these commands to configure
on DSW-A2, identical to the commands on DSW-A1.
And now let’s go to DSW-A2, right click,
and paste them.
Then, I’ll use EXIT to return to global
config mode.
You don’t have to exit after each step by
the way, it’s just a habit of mine.
Okay, now let’s go back to the notepad and
check the commands for the access switches
in office A. They are connected to the distribution
switches via their G0/1 and G0/2 interfaces,
so the first command is INTERFACE RANGE G0/1-2.
Then, the configuration commands are the same
as the other trunks.
So, let me copy these commands, and first
I’ll go on ASW-A1.
Right click, paste.
EXIT.
Then, ASW-A2.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
Finally, ASW-A3.
Okay, Office A is done, now let’s go back
to the notepad for the Office B switches.
The configurations for these switches are
nearly identical to Office A.
The only difference is that Office B uses
VLAN 30 instead of VLAN 40.
Just like in Office A, we’ll make the interfaces
trunks, disable DTP with SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE,
configure the native VLAN, and allow only
the required VLANs.
So, let me copy the configurations for the
distribution switches.
Now let’s paste them into DSW-B1 first.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
Then, DSW-B2.
Right click, paste, and EXIT.
Now let’s go back to the notepad and copy
the configurations for the access switches.
Then paste them into the switches, starting
with ASW-B1.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
Then B2.
Right click, paste, and EXIT.
And then B3.
That’s all for step 3.
Next, let’s look at step 4.
It says to configure one of each office’s
Distribution switches as a VTPv2 server, using
domain name JeremysITLab.
Then, we’ll verify that other switches join
the VTP domain, and configure all Access switches
as VTP clients.
These configurations won’t take too long,
so I’ll do them manually.
In Office A, I’ll configure VTP on DSW-A1,
and it should propagate the configurations
to the other switches.
First, I’ll use DO SHOW VTP STATUS to confirm
the default state.
So, the default VTP Domain Name is null – no
domain name.
The default version is 1, and the default
operating mode is server.
So, we just need to configure a domain name
and enable VTP version 2.
VTP DOMAIN JeremysITLab.
Make sure you get the capitalization correct;
these are case-sensitive.
Then, VTP VERSION 2.
Making these configurations should cause DSW-A1
to send VTP advertisements, and the other
switches should join the domain.
Let’s check on one other switch to verify,
like ASW-A3.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
Okay, ASW-A3 is running VTPv2, and has joined
the JeremysITLab domain.
Now, since step 4 also said to make the access
switches VTP clients, I’ll do that now on
this switch.
VTP MODE CLIENT.
And let’s do it on the others, I’ll go
on A2 next.
VTP MODE CLIENT.
And then A1.
Okay, so Office A is done.
But Office A’s VTP advertisements won’t
reach Office B. VTP advertisements are only
sent out of trunk ports, and we haven’t
configured these links between the distribution
and core switches as trunks – they’re
currently all in access mode.
Later, we’ll make them Layer-3 links.
So, the point is that we need to activate
VTP in Office B, too.
I’ll go on DSW-B1.
Let’s configure the domain: VTP DOMAIN JeremysITLab.
And then VTPv2: VTP VERSION 2.
Instead of checking on this switch, I’ll
just check on ASW-B3; it should have joined
the domain already.
DO SHOW VTP STATUS.
Okay, VTPv2 and domain name JeremysITLab.
Now let’s configure these access switches
as VTP clients.
VTP MODE CLIENT.
Then, ASW-B2.
And finally, ASW-B1.
VTP MODE CLIENT.
Okay, step 4 is now complete.
In steps 5 and 6, we’ll create and name
the VLANs in these two LANs.
In Office A, VLAN 10 is for PCs, VLAN 20 for
phones, VLAN 40 for Wi-Fi, and VLAN 99 for
Management.
Office B is similar, but instead of VLAN 40
for Wi-Fi it has VLAN 30 for servers.
As a side note, why do you think that only
Office A has a Wi-Fi VLAN, even though Office
B also has an access point?
Think about that; we’ll address it later.
So, thanks to VTP, we only have to do these
configurations on a single switch in each
VLAN; VTP should propagate the changes to
the other switches.
So, I’ll go on DSW-A1 again.
First, I’ll make VLAN 10, and name it with
the command NAME PCs.
Then, VLAN 20.
Name it with NAME Phones.
Then, the Wi-Fi VLAN, VLAN 40.
NAME Wi-Fi.
And finally, VLAN 99.
NAME Management.
EXIT.
Let’s double check them with DO SHOW VLAN
BRIEF.
Okay, 10 PCs, 20 Phones, 40 Wi-Fi, and 99
Management.
Now let’s check on ASW-A3 again to make
sure that VTP propagated the changes.
Let’s use DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF here.
Perfect, it has the same four VLANs with the
correct names.
Now let’s do the same in Office B, I’ll
configure the VLANs on DSW-B1.
First, VLAN 10.
NAME PCs.
Then VLAN 20.
NAME Phones.
Office B has SRV1, so I’ll create VLAN 30
and name it with NAME Servers.
Finally, VLAN 99.
NAME Management.
EXIT.
This time, I won’t even check the VLANs
on this switch; let’s just go straight to
ASW-B3 and verify that it has synced its VLAN
database.
DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF.
Okay, it has VLAN 10 for PCs, VLAN 20 for
Phones, VLAN 30 for Servers, and VLAN 99 for
Management.
That’s all for steps 5 and 6.
In step 7, we’ll configure each access switch’s
access port.
Of course, in a real network you can expect
many more end hosts, but in a practice lab
like this there’s not much point in connecting
dozens of PCs to these switches; it just clutters
up the screen.
So, ASW-A1 and B1 are both connected to lightweight
Aps - LWAPs.
As step 7a says, LWAPs will not use FlexConnect.
That means that all traffic will be tunneled
to WLC1 in the Management VLAN – VLAN 99
in this case.
So, these connections to LWAPs can be access
ports; they only need to support the Management
VLAN.
By the way, this is also the reason why Office
B doesn’t have a Wi-Fi VLAN.
Traffic from wireless clients in Office B
is tunneled to WLC1 in Office A, and only
then is assigned to VLAN 40, the Wi-Fi VLAN.
So, let’s configure ASW-A1 and B1 first.
Before we go to ASW-A1, notice that step 7d
says to manually configure access mode and
explicitly disable DTP.
So, these ports are in dynamic auto mode by
default and will operate as access ports,
but for this lab we need to manually configure
access mode and disable DTP.
Okay, let’s go on ASW-A1.
These end hosts are connected to each access
switch’s FastEthernet0/1 interface, so I’ll
configure INTERFACE F0/1.
First, manually configure access mode with
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
DTP is disabled as a side effect of this command
– it will not send or accept DTP messages.
However, the instructions say to explicitly
disable DTP, and the command to do that is
SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE.
The command is redundant in this case, since
configuring access mode stops the port from
sending or accepting DTP messages, but make
sure to read each step carefully and not miss
any configurations, especially on the CCNA
exam.
Finally, let’s assign this port to the management
VLAN: SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 99.
And then EXIT.
Okay, now let’s do the same on ASW-B1.
INTERFACE F0/1.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE to explicitly disable
DTP.
And then SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 99.
EXIT.
Okay, these two switches are done.
Next, let’s configure ASW-A2, A3, and B2,
which are connected to IP phones, in VLAN
20, and PCs, in VLAN 10.
Since these three switches will all have the
same configurations, let’s copy and paste
them.
In my notepad I’ll scroll to Part 2, Step
7, and here are the commands.
First configure access mode and explicitly
disable DTP.
Then, configure access VLAN 10, for the PCs,
and voice VLAN 20, for the phones.
So, I’ll copy these commands.
And I’ll paste them into ASW-A2 first.
Right click, paste, and EXIT to return to
global config mode.
Then, ASW-A3.
Right click, paste, and EXIT.
Finally, ASW-B2.
Finally, we also need to configure ASW-B3’s
connection to SRV1 in VLAN30, the Servers
VLAN.
So, on ASW-B3 configure INTERFACE F0/1.
SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS.
SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE.
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 30.
EXIT.
Okay, step 7 is done.
Next, let’s do step 8, which says to configure
ASW-A1’s connection to WLC1.
There are three points: it must support the
Wi-Fi and management VLANs, the management
VLAN should be untagged, and we must disable
DTP.
So, I’ll configure it as a trunk port that
allows both VLANs, assign the management VLAN
as the native VLAN, and use SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE
to disable DTP.
Okay, let’s go on ASW-A1.
WLC1 is connected to F0/2, so INTERFACE F0/2.
Make it a trunk with SWITCHPORT MODE TRUNK.
Allow only the Wi-Fi and Management VLANs:
SWITCHPORT TRUNK ALLOWED VLAN 40,99.
Configure the Management VLAN as the native
VLAN: SWITCHPORT TRUNK NATIVE VLAN 99.
And then disable DTP: SWITCHPORT NONEGOTIATE.
EXIT.
Okay, that’s step 8.
Finally, in step 9 we’ll administratively
disable all unused ports on access and distribution
switches.
So, let’s go on DSW-A1 to confirm which
ports we need to disable.
To check, use DO SHOW INTERFACES STATUS.
So, all of these interfaces with the status
‘notconnect’ aren’t connected to another
switch and should be disabled.
So, that’s G1/0/6 to 1/0/24, and G1/1/3
and 1/1/4.
So, let’s disable them all at once.
INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/6-24, then a comma, and
G1/1/3-4.
Okay, now disable them with SHUTDOWN.
And then I’ll use EXIT.
Let’s check with DO SHOW INTERFACES STATUS
again.
Okay, all of the ‘notconnect’ interfaces
are now disabled.
And because this is the last step of this
part, I’ll also use DO WRITE to save the
config.
Now, the other distribution switches use the
same interfaces, so to disable their unused
interfaces I’ll just copy and paste the
commands from my notepad.
Here it is: INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/6-24,G1/1/3-4,
and then SHUTDOWN.
I’ll copy these commands, and then paste
them into DSW-A2 first.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
DO WRITE.
Then B1.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
DO WRITE.
And finally B2.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
DO WRITE.
Okay, next up, we’ll disable unused interfaces
on the access switches.
First, I’ll go on ASW-A1.
Let’s see which interfaces are in use with
DO SHOW INTERFACES STATUS.
So, F0/1 is connected to an LWAP and F0/2
to WLC1, and then G0/1 and 0/2 are connected
to the distribution switches.
So, we should disable these remaining FastEthernet
interfaces: F0/3 to 24.
INTERFACE RANGE F0/3-24.
SHUTDOWN.
EXIT.
And then DO WRITE to save.
Now, the other access switches are a bit different:
they only have end hosts connected to their
F0/1 interfaces.
They don’t have a WLC connected like ASW-A1
does.
So, instead of disabling F0/3 to 24, we’ll
disable F0/2 to 24.
I’ll copy and paste the configurations from
my notepad.
Here are the commands: INTERFACE RANGE F0/2-24,
SHUTDOWN.
Copy those commands, and then I’ll paste
them into ASW-A2 first.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
DO WRITE.
Then A3.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
DO WRITE.
Move on to ASW-B1 next.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
DO WRITE.
Then B2.
Right click, paste, EXIT DO WRITE.
And finally, ASW-B3.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
DO WRITE.
Okay that’s step 9, and now part 2 of the
lab is complete.
Look at the completion score.
We aren’t actually halfway through the lab
because we got a big boost after configuring
the first step but we’ve made some good
progress.
Now let’s click next to move on to part
3.
Part 3 covers IP addresses, Layer-3 EtherChannel,
and HSRP, Hot Standby Router Protocol.
This part has a lot of steps, most of it involving
configuring IP addresses, so I’ll do lots
of copying and pasting here.
All of the IP addresses are given in the instructions,
but you can also take a look at the spreadsheet
in the lab files; the second tab in the spreadsheet
has a chart showing all of the IP addresses
that you can refer to.
But let’s get started with step 1, which
involves configuring R1’s interfaces.
G0/0/0 and G0/1/0 are connected to the Internet,
and they will use DHCP to learn their IP addresses.
Then, we’ll manually configure 10.0.0.33/30
on G0/0, .37/30 on G0/1, and create and configure
an IP address on loopback0, 10.0.0.76/32.
So, let’s go on the CLI of R1.
First, I’ll configure G0/0/0 and G0/1/0
with INTERFACE RANGE G0/0/0, a comma, and
then G0/1/0.
Use IP ADDRESS DHCP to make them learn their
IP addresses via DHCP, and don’t forget
NO SHUTDOWN to enable them; router interfaces
are disabled by default.
Next, let’s configure G0/0; this is the
interface connected to CSW1.
INTERFACE G0/0.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.33 255.255.255.252.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Then G0/1, the interface connected to CSW2.
INTERFACE G0/1.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.37 255.255.255.252.
NO SHUTDOWN.
And finally, create loopback 0 with INTERFACE
LOOPBACK0, and configure IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.76,
and a /32 netmask.
So, let’s check R1’s interfaces with DO
SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Okay, G0/0/0 and 0/1/0 learned IP addresses
via DHCP, and G0/0, G0/1, and loopback0 have
the IP addresses we configured.
This is the only step involving R1 in this
section of the lab, so I’ll use DO WRITE
to save its configuration.
Before moving on, let’s take a look at that
spreadsheet I mentioned a couple of times;
it might be useful when you do this lab.
The first tab lists each device’s physical
connections.
For example, here at the top left we can see
that R1 G0/0 is connected to CSW1 G1/0/1,
and G0/1 is connected to CSW2 G1/0/1.
Feel free to refer to this chart, or use SHOW
CDP NEIGHBORS in the lab to figure out how
the devices are connected.
Then, in the IPv4 tab, you can see each device’s
IP addresses.
For example, on the R1 to ISP A link, you
can see the subnet here, 203.0.113.0/30.
Here is ISP A’s IP address, 203.0.113.1.
And here is R1 G0/0/0’s address, .2, which
it learned via DHCP.
All of the other subnets are listed here too.
R1 to ISP B, the management subnet for Office
A, the management subnet for office B, etc.
Once again, feel free to refer to this chart
as needed as you configure this lab.
Okay, let’s return back to the lab itself.
Step 1 is complete, so let’s move on to
step 2, which says to enable IPv4 routing
on all core and distribution switches.
That just requires a single command on each
switch: IP ROUTING.
So, let’s quickly do that on each of them,
starting with CSW1: IP ROUTING.
Then CSW2: IP ROUTING.
DSW-A1.
DSW-A2.
DSW-B1.
And DSW-B2.
Okay, that’s all for step 2.
Next, in step 3 we’ll create a Layer-3 EtherChannel
between CSW1 and CSW2 using a Cisco-proprietary
protocol, so PAgP, and both should actively
try to form an EtherChannel, so we’ll use
desirable mode.
The subnet is 10.0.0.40/30, and CSW1 should
use .41 and CSW2 .42.
Okay, let’s configure that on CSW1 first.
First, let’s see which interfaces are connected
to CSW2.
DO SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
Okay, we can see two entries for CSW2, connected
to CSW1’s G1/0/2 and G1/0/3 interfaces.
And they are connected to the same interfaces
on CSW2: G1/0/2 and 3.
So, let’s configure them with INTERFACE
RANGE G1/0/2-3.
First, I’ll make them routed ports with
NO SWITCHPORT.
Then, make the EtherChannel with CHANNEL-GROUP
1 MODE DESIRABLE.
A Layer-3 EtherChannel’s IP address must
be configured on the port channel interface,
so INTERFACE PORT-CHANNEL1.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.41 and a /30 netmask.
Now let’s do the same on CSW2.
INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/2-3.
NO SWITCHPORT.
CHANNEL-GROUP 1 MODE DESIRABLE.
Then configure the port-channel: INTERFACE
PORT-CHANNEL1.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.42 and a /30 netmask.
Okay, let’s check the EtherChannel with
DO SHOW ETHERCHANNEL SUMMARY.
So, on PortChannel1 RU means Layer 3 and in
use, which is good.
And the member ports both have the P flag,
which is also what we want.
Let’s quickly test by pinging CSW1: DO PING
10.0.0.41.
Because the ARP process in Packet Tracer is
slow, you might see the first ping or two
time out, but then the others work.
And if you ping a second time, they all work.
Okay, that’s all for step 3.
Next, let’s look at steps 4 and 5 together,
which involve configuring the appropriate
interfaces on CSW1 and CSW2.
We just configured the EtherChannel that connects
them, and now we have to configure their other
interfaces, which should all be routed ports.
Their G1/0/1 interfaces connect to R1: CSW1
G1/0/1 is 10.0.0.34/30 and CSW2 is .38.
Then, their G1/1/1, 2, 3, and 4 interfaces
each connect to the distribution switches.
Then, configure a loopback interface on each
of them.
Finally, notice that it also says to disable
all unused interfaces.
Remember that as a security best practice.
So, you can see all of the IP addresses here.
I don’t think you need to see me configuring
these IP addresses one by one, so let’s
look at the commands in the notepad and then
I’ll just copy and paste them.
So, here we are, part 3 step 4, CSW1.
On each of its physical interfaces, I’ll
first use NO SWITCHPORT to make it a routed
port, and then just configure the IP address.
Then I’ll configure loopback0, and disable
the unused interfaces, which are G1/0/4 to
24.
So, I’ll highlight and copy all of these
commands.
Then I’ll go into the CLI of CSW1, right
click, and paste them.
And then EXIT.
This is actually the last step that involves
CSW1 in this part of the lab, so I’ll use
DO WRITE to save the configuration here.
Now let’s do the same for CSW2.
I’ll go back to the notepad, and scroll
down to Part 3, step 5.
So, the commands for CSW2 are identical, aside
from the different IP addresses.
So, let’s highlight and copy these commands,
go to the CLI of CSW2, right click, and paste
them in.
Then I’ll EXIT and use DO WRITE to save
the config.
Okay, steps 4 and 5 are complete.
Now let’s do steps 6, 7, 8, and 9 together,
which involve configuring IP addresses on
the distribution switches’ connections to
the core switches, as well as a loopback interface
on each distribution switch.
Like steps 4 and 5, these steps just involve
configuring IP addresses on interfaces, so
I’ll copy and paste them from my notepad.
First, here’s part 3 step 6, configuring
DSW-A1.
On G1/1/1 and G1/1/2, the connections to CSW1
and CSW2, we’ll configure 10.0.0.46/30 and
.62/30, and then we’ll create loopback0
and configure .79/32.
So, I’ll copy these commands, paste them
into DSW-A1’s CLI, and then EXIT.
Then I’ll go back to the notepad for step
7, configuring DSW-A2.
The commands are the same, just with different
IP addresses.
So, I’ll highlight and copy these commands,
go into the CLI of DSW-A2, right click, paste,
and then EXIT.
Okay, back to the notepad for DSW-B1, which
is step 8, configuring .54/30, .70/30, and
.81/32 on the loopback.
So, highlight and copy these commands, go
into the CLI of DSW-B1, right click, paste,
and then EXIT.
And finally go back to the notepad for step
9, configuring DSW-B2.
I’ll highlight and copy these commands,
go to the CLI of DSW-B2, right click, paste,
and then EXIT.
Okay, steps 6, 7, 8, and 9 are done; we’ve
configured IP addresses on the distribution
switches’ physical and loopback interfaces.
Step 10 is a bit different.
Instead of configuring IP addresses in the
IOS CLI, we’ll configure SRV1’s IP settings
in the Packet Tracer GUI: default gateway
10.5.0.1, IPv4 address 10.5.0.4, with a /24
subnet mask.
So, after clicking on SRV1 go to the Config
tab.
Here, we can configure SRV1’s IPv4 default
gateway: 10.5.0.1.
Then, on the left click on FastEthernet0,
and then IPv4 address 10.5.0.4.
It uses a /8 subnet mask by default because
it’s a Class A address, but change that
to /24.
Okay, we’ve configured SRV1’s IP settings,
so that’s all for step 10.
Step 11 says to configure the following management
IP addresses on the access switches, using
the VLAN 99 interface, and configure the appropriate
subnet’s first usable address as the default
gateway.
So, these access switches are layer 2 switches,
but we want to be able to connect to them
remotely for configuration via SSH, so we
need to configure an IP address and default
gateway on each of them.
ASW-A1, A2, and A3 have IP addresses in the
10.0.0.0/28 subnet, so we’ll configure the
first usable address of that subnet – .1
– as their default gateway.
ASW-B1, B2, and B3 have IP addresses in the
10.0.0.16/28 subnet, so we’ll configure
.17 as their default gateway.
Let’s start in Office A with ASW-A1.
To configure a layer-2 switch’s default
gateway, use IP DEFAULT-GATEWAY, and then
the IP address, 10.0.0.1.
Now let’s configure the VLAN 99 SVI.
INTERFACE VLAN 99.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.4, and the prefix length
is /28, so 255.255.255.240.
EXIT.
This is the last step involving these access
switches in this part of the lab, so I’ll
use DO WRITE to save the config.
And now let’s move on to ASW-A2.
Same default gateway, IP DEFAULT-GATEWAY 10.0.0.1.
INTERFACE VLAN 99.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.5 and a /28 netmask.
EXIT.
And save the config with DO WRITE.
And then the same on ASW-A3.
IP DEFAULT-GATEWAY 10.0.0.1.
INTERFACE VLAN 99.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.6 /28.
EXIT.
DO WRITE.
Office A is done, let’s move on to Office
B, configuring the 10.0.0.16/28 subnet for
management, with .20 for ASW-B1, .21 for B2,
and .22 for B3.
ASW-B1 first.
IP DEFAULT-GATEWAY 10.0.0.17.
INTERFACE VLAN 99.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.20 /28.
EXIT.
DO WRITE.
ASW-B2 next.
IP DEFAULT-GATEWAY 10.0.0.17.
INTERFACE VLAN99.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.21 /28.
EXIT.
DO WRITE.
And finally, ASW-B3.
IP DEFAULT-GATEWAY 10.0.0.17.
INTERFACE VLAN 99.
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.22 /28.
EXIT.
DO WRITE.
Okay, we’ve configured a management IP address
on each access switch.
That’s all for step 11.
In the remaining steps for this part, steps
12 to 19, we will be configuring HSRP on each
office’s distribution switches.
We need to configure HSRP for 4 subnets in
each office.
In Office A, we need HSRP for the management
subnet, the PCs subnet, the Phones subnet,
and the Wi-Fi subnet.
In Office B, we need HSRP for the management
subnet, the PCs subnet, the Phones subnet,
and the Servers subnet.
I’ll demonstrate the complete configuration
for DSW-A1 and A2 in Office A, but for the
sake of time I’ll just copy and paste the
configurations for Office B.
So, steps 12 to 15 focus on Office A. Step
12 says to configure HSRP version 2 group
1 for office A’s management subnet, which
is VLAN 99.
We should make DSW-A1 the active router by
increasing its priority to 5 above the default.
The default is 100, so we should make it 105.
And then, enable preemption on DSW-A1, the
active router.
The subnet is 10.0.0.0/28, with .1 as the
virtual IP, .2 for DSW-A1, and .3 for A2.
So, let’s configure that on DSW-A1 first.
These distribution switches will be the default
gateway for hosts in each subnet, and they
will use HSRP to provide redundancy.
Okay, so on DSW-A1 configure INTERFACE VLAN
99.
First, I’ll configure DSW-A1’s own IP:
IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.2 with a /28 netmask.
Then I’ll enable HSRP version 2 with STANDBY
VERSION 2.
Next I’ll configure the VIP with STANDBY
1 IP 10.0.0.1.
Now let’s ensure that DSW-A1 becomes the
Active router by increasing the priority to
105: STANDBY 1 PRIORITY 105.
Finally, let’s enable preemption so this
switch will always be the active switch as
long as it is up and running.
STANDBY 1 PREEMPT.
Next let’s configure DSW-A2’s side of
the management subnet.
INTERFACE VLAN 99.
DSW-A2’s IP is IP ADDRESS 10.0.0.3 and a
/28 netmask.
Then, enable HSRPv2 with STANDBY VERSION 2.
And finally, configure the VIP with STANDBY
1 IP 10.0.0.1.
That’s all we have to configure on DSW-A2.
We can leave it at the default priority since
we already raised DSW-A1’s priority.
And there’s no need to configure preemption
on the standby router, although you can use
the command if you want to – it won’t
do any harm.
So, we’ve configured HSRP for the management
subnet.
Next, let’s move on to step 13, in which
we’ll configure HSRPv2 for the PCs subnet.
Once again, DSW-A1 should be the active router.
However, notice that it says to configure
group 2, instead of group 1.
The configurations will be nearly identical,
but we will use a different group number and
different IP addresses: the subnet is 10.1.0.0/24,
with .1 as the VIP, .2 for DSW-A1, and .3
for A2.
Let’s start with DSW-A1.
INTERFACE VLAN 10.
First, configure the interface’s IP with
IP ADDRESS 10.1.0.2 255.255.255.0.
Then, enable HSRPv2 with STANDBY VERSION 2.
Then I’ll configure the VIP with STANDBY
2 IP 10.1.0.1.
Make sure to use the correct group number
here.
Then, I’ll raise the priority with STANDBY
2 PRIORITY 105.
And finally STANDBY 2 PREEMPT.
Okay, now let’s configure DSW-A2’s side.
INTERFACE VLAN 10.
IP ADDRESS 10.1.0.3 /24.
STANDBY VERSION 2.
STANDBY 2 IP 10.1.0.1.
Okay, that’s all for A2.
Now we have two more HSRP groups to configure
for Office A in steps 14 and 15.
For these two groups, we will make DSW-A2
the active router instead of A1.
Let’s start with step 14, configuring HSRPv2
group 3 for the phones subnet.
The subnet is 10.2.0.0/24, with .1 as the
VIP, .2 for DSW-A1, and .3 for DSW-A2.
I’ll start with DSW-A2 this time.
INTERFACE VLAN 20.
IP ADDRESS 10.2.0.3 /24.
Then enable HSRPv2, STANDBY VERSION 2.
Configure the VIP: STANDBY 3 IP 10.2.0.1.
And this switch should be the active router,
so STANDBY 3 PRIORITY 105.
STANDBY 3 PREEMPT.
And now, DSW-A1’s side.
INTERFACE VLAN 20.
IP ADDRESS 10.2.0.2 /24.
STANDBY VERSION 2.
STANDBY 3 IP 10.2.0.1.
Finally, we have one more HSRP group to configure
for step 15: the Wi-Fi subnet, VLAN 40.
Again, DSW-A2 should be the active router.
The subnet is 10.6.0.0/24, with .1 as the
VIP, .2 for DSW-A1, and .3 for DSW-A2.
And note that the HSRP group is 4.
Let’s start on DSW-A2.
INTERFACE VLAN 40.
IP ADDRESS 10.6.0.3 /24.
STANDBY VERSION 2.
STANDBY 4 IP 10.6.0.1.
STANDBY 4 PRIORITY 105.
STANDBY 4 PREEMPT.
And then let’s configure DSW-A1’s side.
INTERFACE VLAN 40.
IP ADDRESS 10.6.0.2 /24.
STANDBY VERSION 2.
STANDBY 4 IP 10.6.0.1.
Okay, we’ve finished configuring HSRP in
Office A. DSW-A1 is the active router for
groups 1 and 2, and DSW-A2 is the active router
for groups 3 and 4.
Let me save the config with DO WRITE and EXIT
to return to global config mode.
Then I’ll do the same on A2.
DO WRITE.
EXIT.
Steps 16 to 19 are the same thing, but for
Office B. HSRPv2 group 1 is for the management
subnet, VLAN 99.
Group 2 is for the PCs subnet, VLAN 10.
Group 3 is for the Phones subnet, VLAN 20.
And Group 4 is for the Servers subnet, VLAN
30.
DSW-B1 should be active for groups 1 and 2,
and DSW-B2 should be active for groups 3 and
4.
Instead of going through the configurations
one by one, I’ll just copy and paste them
from my notepad.
So, here we are.
Part 3, steps 16 to 19.
DSW-B1 will be primary for HSRP groups 1 and
2, and standby for groups 3 and 4.
Let me highlight and copy these configurations.
And then go into the CLI of DSW-B1.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
DO WRITE.
And now DSW-B2, let’s look at the commands
in the notepad.
So, this switch will be standby for groups
1 and 2, and active for groups 3 and 4.
Let’s highlight and copy these commands,
go into the CLI of DSW-B2, right click, paste,
EXIT.
DO WRITE.
Okay, we’re finally done with part 3.
We configured IP addresses on R1 and all of
these switches, configured Layer-3 EtherChannel
between CSW1 and CSW2, and configured various
HSRP groups among these distribution switches.
Now I’ll click Next to move on to part 4.
Part 4 is all about Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol.
This part shouldn’t take so long.
In step 1, we’ll configure Rapid PVST+ on
the access and distribution switches, and
then in step 2 we’ll enable PortFast and
BPDU Guard on the appropriate ports.
So, let’s get right into it with step 1.
First of all, we should enable Rapid PVST+
on the distribution and access switches.
By default, these switches in Packet Tracer
run standard PVST+, not the Rapid version.
To prove that, I’ll go on DSW-A1 and use
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE.
Notice that it says ‘Spanning tree enabled
protocol ieee’.
Note that this doesn’t mean it’s running
IEEE-standard Spanning Tree Protocol; this
means it is running Cisco’s Per-VLAN Spanning
Tree Plus, PVST+.
To change it to Rapid PVST+, the command is
SPANNING-TREE MODE RAPID-PVST.
And let’s double check with DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE
again.
Okay, now it says ‘rstp’, meaning Rapid
PVST+ is enabled.
Okay, let me highlight the SPANNING-TREE MODE
RAPID-PVST command and copy it.
Now I’ll quickly go on to the other switches
and paste it in.
DSW-A2 first.
Right click, paste.
Then DSW-B1.
And DSW-B2.
Right click, paste.
Then the access switches.
ASW-A1.
Right click, paste.
And A2.
And A3.
Right click, paste.
Then ASW-B1.
Then ASW-B2.
Right click, paste.
And finally, ASW-B3.
Right click, and paste.
Okay, now all of these switches are running
Rapid PVST+, instead of the classic PVST+.
Now let’s look at the sub steps of step
1.
1a says to ensure that the Root Bridge for
each VLAN aligns with the HSRP active router
by configuring the lowest possible STP priority.
So, that means a priority of 0.
So, in Office A, DSW-A1 should be the root
for the Management VLAN, which is VLAN 99,
and the PCs VLAN, which is VLAN 10.
And DSW-A2 should be the root for the Phones
VLAN, VLAN 20, and the Wi-Fi VLAN, VLAN 40.
The same applies for Office B, with the Servers
VLAN replacing the Wi-Fi VLAN.
Okay, and then B says to configure the HSRP
standby router for each VLAN with an STP priority
one increment above the lowest priority.
So, the lowest priority is 0.
What’s one increment above that?
Well, STP priority is configured in increments
of 4096, so one increment above 0 is 4096.
Let’s configure that on each distribution
switch, starting with DSW-A1.
So, first I’ll set its priority to 0 for
VLANs 10 and 99 with SPANNING-TREE VLAN 10,99
PRIORITY 0.
You can also do it in two separate commands
– one for VLAN 10 and one for VLAN 99 – the
effect is the same.
Let me double check that it’s the root bridge
now – VLAN 10 first.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 10.
Okay, it says ‘this bridge is the root’.
And then for VLAN 99.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 99.
Okay, same for this VLAN.
Then, I’ll set its priority to 4096 for
VLANs 20 and 40 – the phones VLAN and the
Wi-Fi VLAN.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 20,40 PRIORITY 4096.
Okay, that’s all for this switch in this
part of the lab, so I’ll use DO WRITE to
save the config.
Now let’s configure DSW-A2.
First, I’ll set its priority to 0 for VLANs
20 and 40.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 20,40 PRIORITY 0.
Next, let’s set it to 4096 for VLANs 10
and 99.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 10,99 PRIORITY 4096.
And save the config with DO WRITE.
Now let’s do the same thing in Office B.
First, I’ll set DSW-B1’s priority to 0
for the PCs VLAN and the Management VLAN – VLANs
10 and 99.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 10,99 PRIORITY 0.
And then set it to 4096 for the Phones VLAN
and the Servers VLAN – VLANs 20 and 30.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 20,30 PRIORITY 4096.
And let’s save the config with DO WRITE.
And finally, DSW-B2.
First, I’ll set the priority to 0 for VLANS
20 and 30.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 20,30 PRIORITY 0.
And then to 4096 for VLANs 10 and 99.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 10,99 PRIORITY 4096.
And then save the config with DO WRITE.
Now let’s do step 2, which says to enable
PortFast and BPDU Guard on all ports connected
to end hosts, including WLC1.
Perform the configurations in interface config
mode.
Okay, so PortFast allows ports connected to
end hosts to immediately move to the STP Forwarding
state, without having to wait 30 seconds to
transition through listening and learning.
You should generally configure it on ports
connected to end hosts so they don’t have
to wait to access the network after physically
connecting to the switch.
BPDU Guard, on the other hand, is used to
disable a port if it receives a spanning tree
BPDU.
You should configure it on ports connected
to end hosts to prevent users from connecting
an unauthorized switch to the network.
So, I’ll start on ASW-A1.
First, I’ll configure PortFast and BPDU
Guard on F0/1, which is connected to LWAP1.
INTERFACE F0/1.
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST.
SPANNING-TREE BPDUGUARD ENABLE.
And now F0/2, which is connected to WLC1.
INTERFACE F0/2.
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST.
Let’s pause for a second here.
Notice the second warning message.
Portfast has been configured on F0/2 but will
only have effect when the interface is in
a non-trunking mode.
That’s a problem: F0/2 is a trunk port,
because it’s connected to WLC1 and needs
to support the Management and Wi-Fi VLANs.
Here’s the solution.
I’ll use the up arrow to go back to the
command, and then use the question mark.
Notice the TRUNK option.
As the description says, this will enable
portfast on the interface even in trunk mode.
Okay, so SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST TRUNK.
There we go.
And now I’ll enable BPDU Guard.
SPANNING-TREE BPDUGUARD ENABLE.
EXIT.
And save the config with DO WRITE.
Okay, so we’re done with ASW-A1.
It was a special case because of that trunk
port.
The other access switches only have one host
connected and require the same commands to
enable PortFast and BPDU Guard, so I’ll
return to my notepad.
Here are the commands.
INTERFACE F0/1.
SPANNING-TREE PORTFAST.
SPANNING-TREE BPDUGUARD ENABLE.
So, I’ll copy these commands, and let’s
paste them into ASW-A2.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
And save with DO WRITE.
Then ASW-A3.
Right click, paste, EXIT, DO WRITE.
And ASW-B1.
Then B2.
Right click, paste, EXIT, DO WRITE.
And finally, ASW-B3.
Okay, that’s all for part 4 of this lab.
We enabled Rapid PVST+ on the distribution
and access switches, modified the priority
values of the distribution switches for each
VLAN to align with the HSRP active and standby
routers, and then configured PortFast and
BPDU Guard on the access switches.
Now I’ll click Next to go to part 5.
This part of the lab is all about static and
dynamic routing.
In step 1, we’ll configure OSPF on R1 and
the core and distribution switches.
Then, in step 2 we’ll configure default
routes on R1 for its Internet connections,
and then make R1 an ASBR that advertises its
default route to other routers in the OSPF
domain.
So, let’s get started with step 1.
Step 1 says to configure OSPF on R1’s LAN-facing
interfaces, so these two connected to CSW1
and 2, and all Core and Distribution switches,
specifically on all Layer-3 interfaces.
Now, there are a lot of specific instructions
below, so before jumping into the configurations
it’s important to read all of these.
A says to use process ID 1 and Area 0.
B Says to manually configure each device’s
router ID to match the loopback interface
IP.
So, R1’s loopback is 10.0.0.76, CSW1’s
is .77, CSW2’s is .78, etc.
Okay, then C says that, on switches, you should
use the NETWORK command to match the exact
IP address of each interface.
In other words, use the NETWORK command with
a /32 wildcard mask, which is 0.0.0.0, to
enable OSPF on each interface.
Then D says that you should enable OSPF in
interface config mode on R1.
You can do that with the IP OSPF 1 AREA 0
command on each interface.
Moving on to E, it says to make sure OSPF
is enabled on all loopback interfaces, too.
And they should be passive interfaces.
And F says that each distribution switch’s
SVIs, except the management VLAN SVI, should
be passive too.
So, by default, after enabling OSPF on the
distribution switch SVIs, they will send OSPF
hello messages out of their SVIs to the LANs.
And they will receive each other’s Hellos
and become OSPF neighbors.
However, we don’t need them to become neighbors
four times – once for each VLAN.
We’ll make all SVIs except the Management
SVI passive, so they will only send hellos
out of the Management SVI.
Finally, G says to configure all physical
connections between OSPF neighbors to use
a network type that doesn’t elect a DR and
BDR.
In other words, you should configure the point-to-point
network type on the interfaces.
Note that, in packet tracer, the necessary
command isn’t available on the Layer-3 PortChannel
interface between CSW1 and CSW2.
So, we’ll leave this link as the default
network type.
Okay, so we have a lot of configurations to
do.
I’ll configure the first couple of devices
one command at a time in the CLI to walk you
through the process, but after that I’ll
just copy and paste the commands.
So, let’s open the CLI of R1 and get started.
First, I’ll create the OSPF process with
ROUTER OSPF 1.
Now, let’s specify R1’s router ID.
Actually, if I check the current router ID
with DO SHOW IP OSPF, you can see that the
ID is 10.0.0.76 – the IP address of its
loopback interface.
However, step 1b said to manually configure
each device’s router ID, so I will do that
with ROUTER-ID 10.0.0.76.
Okay, there is only one more command to configure
in this mode, which is PASSIVE-INTERFACE LOOPBACK0.
We haven’t enabled OSPF on loopback0 yet,
but let’s do that next.
The instructions said to activate OSPF in
interface config mode on R1, so INTERFACE
LOOPBACK0.
And then activate OSPF with IP OSPF 1 AREA
0.
And now we just have to activate OSPF on R1’s
two LAN-facing interfaces, connected to CSW1
and CSW2.
Those are G0/0 and 0/1, so INTERFACE RANGE
G0/0-1.
Let’s activate OSPF.
IP OSPF 1 AREA 0.
And then also configure the point-to-point
network type.
IP OSPF NETWORK POINT-TO-POINT.
Okay that’s all for R1.
We configured its router ID, made its loopback
interface passive, activated OSPF on the appropriate
interfaces, and configured the point-to-point
network type.
Next, I’ll go on CSW1.
First, create the OSPF process with ROUTER
OSPF 1.
And like on R1, I’ll first configure the
router ID with ROUTER-ID 10.0.0.77 – the
IP address of its loopback interface.
And let’s make the loopback passive: PASSIVE-INTERFACE
LOOPBACK0.
Now, for the switches, the instructions say
to activate OSPF using the NETWORK command
with a /32 wildcard mask.
So, let’s see the IP addresses of CSW1’s
interfaces.
If I use DO SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF like this,
the output is full of these interfaces without
any IP address.
To filter out these interfaces from the output,
let me add a pipe to the end of the command,
EXCLUDE, and then ‘un’ to filter any lines
that include ‘unassigned’.
There we go; now we can only see the interfaces
that have an IP address.
So, let’s activate OSPF on these interfaces
in order, starting with port-channel 1.
NETWORK 10.0.0.41 0.0.0.0 AREA 0.
And now I can simply hit the up arrow to return
to that command, and then change the IP address
to .34 for the G1/0/1 interface.
And then up arrow again, change it to .45
for G1/1/1.
Up arrow again, .49 for G1/1/2.
Then again for G1/1/3, .53.
Up arrow again, change it to .57 for G1/1/4.
And one more time, change it to .77 for loopback0.
Okay, we’ve activated OSPF on all of CSW1’s
interfaces.
But there’s one more thing to configure
on CSW1: we need to configure the point-to-point
network type on its physical ports: G1/0/1,
and G1/1/1, 2, 3, and 4.
So, INTERFACE RANGE G1/0/1, a comma, and then
G1/1/1-4.
And configure the network type with IP OSPF
NETWORK POINT-TO-POINT.
Okay, that’s all for CSW1.
Finally, I’ll EXIT and use DO WRITE to save
the config.
The configurations for the rest of the switches
are similar, so I’ll just copy them from
the notepad and then paste them into each
device.
To repeat what I said before, when you are
doing this lab yourself, it’s important
that you prepare all of these configurations
yourself – otherwise, it’s not practice.
But, for the sake of the video, let’s do
this to speed things up – the video is long
enough as is.
So, CSW2’s configurations are identical
to CSW1’s, just with different IP addresses.
So, I’ll copy them, go into the CLI of CSW2,
and paste them in.
Then I’ll EXIT and save the config with
DO WRITE.
Now let’s return to the notepad and look
at the commands for DSW-A1.
We’ll set its router ID, make its loopback
interface passive, and also make its SVIs
passive for VLANs 10, 20, and 40 – but not
for the management VLAN, VLAN 99.
Then activate OSPF on each interface.
And finally configure the point-to-point network
type on G1/1/1 and 1/1/2 – those are the
physical links connecting to CSW1 and 2.
So, I’ll highlight and copy these commands,
go to the CLI of DSW-A1, and paste them.
Then, EXIT and DO WRITE.
Okay, and now let’s return to the notepad
and look at DSW-A2’s configurations.
These are identical to DSW-A1’s, just with
different IP addresses.
So, I’ll copy them, go into the CLI of DSW-A2,
and paste them.
Then EXIT and DO WRITE.
Now, before moving on let’s check its OSPF
neighbors.
DO SHOW IP OSPF NEIGHBOR.
So, it has three neighbors.
10.0.0.79 is DSW-A1.
Notice that the interface is VLAN 99.
If we didn’t make the VLAN 10, 20 and 40
SVIs passive, DSW-A1 and A2 would become OSPF
neighbors with each other four times – once
for each SVI – that isn’t necessary.
And notice that, because we made G1/1/1 and
1/1/2 point-to-point, no DR or BDR are elected
for the connections with CSW1 and CSW2: 10.0.0.77
and 78 here.
Okay, now let’s do the same for DSW-B1 and
B2 in Office B. So, I’ll return to the notepad.
The configurations are basically identical,
with different IP addresses of course.
And instead of VLAN 40, Office B has VLAN
30.
But that’s it.
So, I’ll copy these commands for DSW-B1,
open its CLI, and paste them.
Then I’ll EXIT and DO WRITE.
And finally, let’s return to the notepad
and copy the commands for DSW-B2.
Once again, these commands are identical,
just with different IP addresses.
Open the CLI of DSW-B2, paste the commands,
and EXIT, DO WRITE.
Okay, we’re done with step 1, configuring
OSPF.
Now let’s move on to step 2.
It says to configure one static default route
for each of R1s Internet connections.
They should be recursive routes, meaning they
should specify a next hop IP address, but
not an exit interface.
For review, recursive routes specify only
the next hop IP, directly connected routes
specify only the exit interface, and fully
specified routes specify both.
2a says to make the route via G0/1/0 a floating
static route by configuring an AD value 1
greater than the default, and then B says
that R1 should function as an ASBR, advertising
its default route to other routers in the
OSPF domain.
Okay, let’s go back to the CLI of R1.
So, R1 has two Internet connections.
Let’s see.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
There they are: G0/0/0 and G0/1/0.
Both of them have a /30 prefix length.
You can confirm that with DO SHOW IP INTERFACE
G0/0/0.
You can see that here in the second line,
Internet address is 203.0.113.2/30.
A /30 subnet only has two usable addresses,
.1 and .2 in this case, so that means the
ISP’s IP address must be 203.0.113.1.
Let’s check with DO PING 203.0.113.1.
Okay, so that should be the next hop IP of
one of the routes.
And let’s verify the other one.
DO SHOW IP INTERFACE G0/1/0.
Okay, Internet address is 203.0.113.6/30.
This is the .4/30 subnet, and the other usable
address is .5, which should be the ISP’s
address.
Let’s ping it.
DO PING 203.0.113.5.
Okay, it works.
That should be the next hop IP of the other
default route.
So, let’s configure those routes.
The first one, via 203.0.113.1.
IP ROUTE 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 203.0.113.1.
Okay, that’s it.
Now let’s configure the second one via .5
and make it a floating static route.
IP ROUTE 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 203.0.113.5.
Now, the instructions say to make the AD 1
higher than the default.
What’s the default administrative distance
of a static route in Cisco IOS?
It’s 1, so let’s specify 2 here.
So, we configured two default routes.
Let’s verify that only one is active in
the routing table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Look down at the bottom, and there it is.
0.0.0.0/0, via 203.0.113.1.
Perfect.
Finally, let’s do step 2b, in which we’ll
make R1 an OSPF ASBR so it advertises its
default route.
To do that, go back to OSPF config mode with
ROUTER OSPF 1.
And then use DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE.
And that’s it.
Finally, I’ll use EXIT and DO WRITE.
Now, if I go to any of the layer-3 switches,
such as DSW-B2, and use DO SHOW IP ROUTE,
I should see the default route.
You can see it down at the bottom of the routing
table.
Notice it has two routes installed: one with
CSW1 as the next hop, and one with CSW2 as
the next hop.
Now, if I ping R1’s internet IP from this
switch, it should work.
DO PING 203.0.113.2.
Okay, the ping works.
Now, what about the ISP’s IP address?
Let’s try.
DO PING 203.0.113.1.
It gets five Us in reply, meaning ‘unreachable’.
The reason for that is DSW-B2 is pinging from
a private IP address, which the ISP’s router
doesn’t accept.
To solve that, we need to configure NAT, network
address translation.
So, let’s click Next in the lab instructions
to move on to Part 6.
In part 6 of this lab, we’ll configure various
network services like DHCP, DNS, NTP, SNMP,
Syslog, FTP, SSH, and NAT.
We’ve got a lot of configurations to do
in this section, so let’s get started with
step 1, which says to configure the following
DHCP pools on R1 to make it serve as the DHCP
server for hosts in Offices A and B. Also,
we must exclude the first ten usable addresses
of each pool.
So, which pools do we need to configure?
First, a pool for Office A’s management
subnet.
LWAP1 will lease an IP address from this pool.
Then, a pool for Office A’s PCs.
PC1 and PC2 will use this pool.
And then a pool for Office A’s phones, which
Phone1 and Phone2 will use.
Then, we will configure the equivalent management,
PC, and phone pools for Office B, and finally
a single pool for wireless clients.
So, all of these pools will use similar commands,
just with different IP addresses.
I’ll configure the first one manually, but
then copy and paste the others.
But before we configure the pools, let’s
configure the excluded address ranges: the
first ten addresses of each subnet.
To do that, I’ll open up my notepad again.
So, here’s part 6 step 1.
These are the seven ranges of addresses we’ll
exclude, in the same order as the instructions.
Office A’s management, PC, and phone subnets.
Then Office B’s management, PC, and phone
subnets.
And finally, the Wi-Fi subnet.
The command is IP DHCP EXCLUDED-ADDRESS, followed
by the first address in the range, and then
the last address in the range.
So, these commands exclude the first 10 usable
host addresses of each subnet, so R1 won’t
assign them to clients.
I’ll highlight and copy these commands,
and then go into the CLI of R1, and paste
them.
Now let’s configure the DHCP pools.
Like I said, I’ll do the first one, for
Office A’s management subnet, manually.
Let’s look at the info again.
The subnet is 10.0.0.0/28, and the default
gateway is 10.0.0.1, which is the HSRP VIP
that we configured on DSW-A1 and A2.
The domain name is jeremysitlab.com, the DNS
server is 10.5.0.4, which is SRV1, and then
the WLC is 10.0.0.7, WLC1.
And note that name: A-Mgmt.
This has to match or it won’t be marked
correctly when you click ‘Check Results’.
So, let’s go back to the CLI of R1, and
use IP DHCP POOL A-Mgmt to create the pool.
Then, use NETWORK 10.0.0.0 255.255.255.240
to specify the 10.0.0.0/28 subnet.
And DEFAULT-ROUTER 10.0.0.1 to specify the
default gateway.
Next, configure the domain name with DOMAIN-NAME
jeremysitlab.com.
And then I’ll specify SRV1 as the DNS server
with DNS-SERVER 10.5.0.4.
Finally, we need to specify the WLC address
for lightweight access points.
Actually, take another look at the network.
In office A, when LWAP1 sends a broadcast
message to identify any WLCs in the network,
WLC1 will receive that broadcast and respond.
So, we technically don’t need to specify
the WLC address in this DHCP pool.
However, for Office B’s management DHCP
pool, it is necessary.
When LWAP2 sends a broadcast message, it won’t
reach WLC1, so we should specify WLC1’s
IP address in the DHCP pool, so LWAP2 can
send a unicast message directly to WLC1 to
connect.
However, the lab instructions say to configure
the WLC address for this pool, so let’s
go back to the CLI.
I’ll use the question mark to see the available
commands.
To specify a WLC address, we have to use the
OPTION keyword.
After that, specify the option number.
The correct number here is option 43, then
IP, and then the IP address: 10.0.0.7.
So, that’s the command: OPTION 43 IP 10.0.0.7.
Okay, so that’s the first pool, and the
rest will use basically the same commands,
so let’s go back to the notepad.
Here are the commands for the rest of the
pools: A-PC, A-Phone, B-Mgmt, B-PC, B-Phone,
and Wi-Fi.
I’ll highlight and copy these commands,
return to the CLI of R1, right click, and
paste.
And EXIT.
Okay, so step 1 is done.
But if I use DO SHOW IP DHCP BINDING on R1
it won’t show any DHCP leases.
The reason for that is that clients’ broadcast
DHCP requests won’t reach R1.
So, in step 2 we’ll configure the distribution
switches to function as DHCP relay agents,
forwarding clients’ broadcast messages to
R1’s loopback0 IP address, which is 10.0.0.76.
To do that, we need to use the IP HELPER-ADDRESS
command on the interfaces that receive clients’
broadcast DHCP messages.
In this case, those are the various SVIs on
each switch.
I’ll go back to the notepad to see the commands.
On DSW-A1 and A2, we’ll use IP HELPER-ADDRESS
10.0.0.76 on the VLAN 10, 20, 40, and 99 SVIs.
And then on B1 and B2 it’ll be for VLANs
10, 20, 30, and 99.
The thing to note here is that this command
must be configured on the correct interface:
the interface that receives the broadcast
DHCP messages from clients.
More specifically, the layer-3 interface:
each SVI in this case, not the physical layer
2 switch port.
Okay, let’s copy the commands for Office
A, then open the CLI of DSW-A1.
And paste the commands in.
EXIT.
Okay, DSW-A2 needs the same commands, so let’s
open its CLI, and paste the commands in.
EXIT.
Then, I’ll return to the notepad and copy
these commands for Office B.
The only difference is that it uses VLAN 30
instead of VLAN 40.
Now I’ll go on to DSW-B1.
And paste the commands in.
EXIT.
Finally, DSW-B2.
Let’s paste the commands in here, and EXIT.
Okay, we’re done with step 2.
Now hosts should be able to lease IP addresses.
To test, I’ll go on PC1.
From the Desktop tab, click on Command Prompt.
And then use IPCONFIG /RENEW to send a DHCP
DISCOVER and lease an IP address.
And a few seconds later, it works.
Let’s try some pings now.
How about pinging R1’s loopback interface?
PING 10.0.0.76.
Okay, the ping works.
And how about one of R1’s internet interfaces?
PING 203.0.113.2.
That ping works as well.
However, what if I ping the ISP router at
PING 203.0.113.1.
As you can see, this ping doesn’t work.
Once again, this is because we need to configure
NAT on R1.
That’ll be later in a later step.
But now, let’s move on to step 3.
In this step, we’ll configure some DNS entries
on SRV1: one for google.com, one for youtube.com,
and one for jeremysitlab.com.
The three most popular sites on the web.
And then we’ll create another entry mapping
www.jeremysitlab.com to jeremysitlab.com.
So, let’s open up SRV1 again.
And from the services tab, click on DNS.
First, make sure to turn on the DNS service
here, or SRV1 won’t respond to DNS queries.
Now let’s create those three IP address
mappings.
To map a domain name to an IPv4 address, we
need to make an A record, which is the default
here.
So, I’ll type google.com for the name, and
then let’s check that address.
172.253.62.100.
Okay, so I’ll just highlight the address
here, left click and copy, and then paste
it here and click Add to add the entry.
Next, type youtube.com for the name.
And let’s copy the address here.
152.250.31.93.
And paste it in the address box, and add the
entry.
Finally, type jeremysitlab.com for the domain
name, and let’s copy the address.
66.235.200.145.
And then paste it in the address bar.
Okay, so we’ve created three A records mapping
names to IP addresses.
Now we have to map a name to another name,
and for that we need a CNAME, canonical name,
record.
So, in the ‘name’ box type www.jeremysitlab.com.
And then in the host name box type jeremysitlab.com.
Okay, we’ve created the DNS records.
Now let’s test if DNS works.
I’ll go back to PC1, and first let’s ping
SRV1 to make sure that PC1 can reach it.
PING 10.5.0.4.
Okay, PC1 can reach SRV1.
Now let’s try one of those entries we created.
PING google.com.
Okay, the ping failed because we still haven’t
configured NAT, but notice that DNS itself
worked.
Using DNS, PC1 was able to translate google.com
into this IP address.
And how about PING jeremysitlab.com.
Same thing, the ping doesn’t work, but DNS
resolution does work.
And one more: PING www.jeremysitlab.com.
Same thing.
Notice that it was translated to the same
IP address as jeremysitlab.com.
www.jeremysitlab.com was translated into jeremysitlab.com,
which was then translated into this IP address.
Next, in step 4, we’ll configure all routers
and switches to use the domain name jeremysitlab.com
and to use SRV1 as their DNS server.
This requires the same two commands on all
devices, so once again I’ll just copy and
paste the commands from the notepad.
Those two commands are IP DOMAIN NAME jeremysitlab.com
and IP NAME-SERVER 10.5.0.4.
I’ll copy these commands, and then paste
them into each device.
Feel free to skip ahead in the video.
So, R1 first.
Right click, paste.
And CSW1.
Right click and paste.
And then CSW2.
Moving on to the distribution switches.
DSW-A1.
DSW-A2.
And then DSW-B1.
And DSW-B2.
And then the access switches.
ASW-A1 first.
Then ASW-A2.
And then A3.
And then Office B. ASW-B1.
ASW-B2.
And ASW-B3.
And just to test that DNS works on these devices,
first let’s ping SRV1 from here on ASW-B3.
DO PING 10.5.0.4.
Okay, the ping works.
And now let’s try DO PING google.com.
Okay, once again the ping itself doesn’t
work, but DNS was able to translate the name
into an IP address.
Now let’s move on to step 5, in which we’ll
configure NTP.
5a says to make R1 a stratum 5 NTP server.
We can do that with the NTP MASTER command.
And then 5b says that R1 should learn the
time from NTP server 216.239.35.0.
5c is just a note saying that you don’t
need to wait for NTP to sync – it can take
a very long time, so once you’ve done the
configurations you can just move on.
So, let’s go on the CLI of R1.
To make R1 an NTP server with a specific stratum
level, use NTP MASTER, followed by the stratum,
which should be 5 in this case.
So, that’s the first half.
Next, to make R1 sync to an external NTP server,
use NTP SERVER, followed by the IP address,
which is 216.239.35.0.
And that’s all for step 5 – like I said,
NTP takes a very long time to sync, so let’s
just move on.
Step 6 is a continuation of step 5.
We’ll configure NTP on all core, distribution,
and access switches, making them sync to R1.
Specifically, they should use the IP address
of R1’s loopback interface.
Additionally, these clients should authenticate
R1 using key number 1 and the password ‘ccna’.
So, first I’ll create the authentication
key on R1, and then configure the clients.
To create the key, the command is NTP AUTHENTICATION-KEY,
followed by the key number, which should be
1, MD5, and then the key itself, ccna.
However, that’s not enough; we need to specify
it as a “trusted key” with NTP TRUSTED-KEY
1.
Okay, that’s all for R1.
Now let’s do the clients: all of the switches.
The configurations are identical on all switches,
so I’ll do one manually and then copy and
paste the rest.
So, let’s go on CSW1.
First, use the same two commands we just configured
on R1.
NTP AUTHENTICATION-KEY 1 MD5 ccna.
And then NTP TRUSTED-KEY 1.
So, we’ve created the authentication key
and trusted it.
Next, let’s tell CSW1 to sync to R1, while
using key number 1 for authentication.
The command is NTP SERVER 10.0.0.76 KEY 1.
And that’s it.
As I said, NTP takes forever to sync, so we
won’t wait for that.
Let’s just configure the other switches.
So, I’ll go to the notepad, and here it
is: part 6, step 6.
I’ll highlight and copy those three commands,
and let’s go to CSW2 next, and paste them
in.
And now the distribution and access switches.
Again, feel free to skip ahead in
the video.
DSW-A1.
DSW-A2.
DSW-B1.
DSW-B2.
And then the access switches, starting with
A1.
Then ASW-A2.
ASW-A3.
ASW-B1.
ASW-B2.
And ASW-B3.
Okay, that’s all for NTP.
Next, in steps 7 and 8, we’ll configure
SNMP and Syslog.
I’ll do these two steps together because
all devices need the same commands, so I can
just copy and paste them together.
Let’s see the requirements.
Step 7 says to configure the SNMP community
string SNMPSTRING on all routers and switches.
It should allow GET messages, but not SET
messages.
So, that means it should be a read only string,
rather than a read-write string.
Let’s configure that on R1 before looking
at the Syslog requirements.
The command to configure an SNMP community
string is SNMP-SERVER COMMUNITY, followed
by the string, SNMPSTRING in this case, and
then RO for read only.
That’s it.
With that configured, an SNMP server should
be able to send SNMP GET messages to read
information from this router.
Now let’s go back to see the Syslog requirements
in step 8.
It says to send Syslog messages to SRV1, and
messages of all severity levels should be
logged.
Then 8b says to enable logging to the buffer,
and reserve 8192 bytes of memory for the buffer.
So, let’s go into R1 and configure that.
First we need to send Syslog message to SRV1.
To enable that, just use LOGGING 10.5.0.4.
And we need to ensure that messages of all
severity levels are sent.
So, levels 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, and 0.
To configure that, use LOGGING TRAP DEBUGGING.
That enables logging at the debugging level,
level 7, and below.
Finally, we need to enable logging to the
buffer, which is stored in local memory on
the device.
The command to do that is LOGGING BUFFERED,
but the instructions also specify that the
buffer’s size should be 8192 bytes, so add
8192 to the end of this command.
There we go.
Let’s quickly check that everything is correct
with DO SHOW LOGGING.
So, logging to the console, monitor, and buffer
are all enabled at level debugging.
And if I scroll to the bottom, you can see
that the buffer is 8192 bytes in size.
The rest of the devices all need the exact
same commands as R1, so let me open up the
notepad and copy these commands under part
6, steps 7 and 8.
And now let’s paste them into the remaining
devices, CSW1 first.
Then CSW2.
DSW-A1.
DSW-A2.
DSW-B1.
DSW-B2.
And the access switches, starting with ASW-A1.
A2.
A3.
ASW-B1.
ASW-B2.
And finally, ASW-B3.
So, we’ve configured SNMP and Syslog on
all of these devices.
Now let’s move on to step 9.
In step 9, we’ll use FTP on R1 to download
a new IOS version from SRV1.
To do so, well first configure R1’s default
FTP credentials in 9a, copy the file from
SRV1 in 9b, and then reboot R1 using the new
IOS version in 9c.
So, let’s do 9a first, which says to configure
username and password cisco on R1.
To configure the username, the command is
IP FTP USERNAME, and in this case the username
should be cisco.
And then to configure the password it’s
IP FTP PASSWORD cisco.
That’s it.
Next let’s look closer at step 9b.
We should use FTP to copy this file from SRV1
to R1’s flash drive.
So, you can copy the file name right here
from the instructions, but let’s go find
it on SRV1.
From the services tab on SRV1, click on FTP,
and you can see the available files here.
Look for c2900 universal, there it is.
So, click on the file name here, use ctrl-c
to copy, and now let’s go back to R1.
First, let’s verify that R1 can ping SRV1.
DO PING 10.5.0.4.
Okay, connectivity is fine.
Now let’s copy the file to flash with DO
COPY FTP: FLASH:.
First, it asks for the address of the remote
host.
Enter 10.5.0.4 for SRV1.
Then the source filename, the name of the
file on SRV1.
So, I’ll paste that filename that I just
copied here.
And finally, the destination filename.
Just hit enter here to accept the default,
which is the same as the source filename.
Now, it’ll start copying the file.
Just a warning, this is going to take a very
long time.
It’ll take so long that you’ll think it’s
not working, but it is.
So if you’re doing the lab now, get up,
grab a drink, take a break, and come back
later.
I’ll stop the video here and return when
the download is complete.
Okay, the download is done.
I’ll use DO SHOW FLASH: to view the file.
There it is.
Now let’s configure R1 to boot using this
new IOS image.
First, highlight and copy the filename if
you need to.
Then, to tell R1 to boot from this file, use
BOOT SYSTEM FLASH:, and then paste the filename.
Now, before rebooting the router it’s very
important to save the config; otherwise, the
BOOT SYSTEM command won’t take effect.
So, use DO WRITE.
And before rebooting, let’s also use DO
SHOW VERSION, and look at the top line of
the output.
Version 15.1.
After rebooting, we’ll check to make sure
that it changes.
So, I’ll use DO RELOAD to reboot the router.
This can take quite a few minutes on a real
device, but fortunately these routers in Packet
Tracer only take about 10 or 15 seconds.
Once it has booted up, log in with cisco and
password ccna.
Then ENABLE and password jeremysitlab.
And now let’s check the version again with
SHOW VERSION.
So, look at the top line, and there it is:
version 15.5, upgraded from the previous 15.1.
Now let’s look at the instructions one more
time.
At the end of step 9c it says to delete the
old IOS file from flash.
So, let’s view the contents of flash again
with SHOW FLASH.
And then highlight the filename of the old
version, right click and copy the name.
And then delete it with DELETE FLASH, with
a colon, and then paste the filename here.
So, delete the file, and let’s double check
with SHOW FLASH once more.
Okay, now it’s gone.
So, we’re done with step 9.
Let’s take a look at step 10 next.
It says to configure SSH for secure remote
access on all routers and switches.
Okay, let’s read through the requirements.
10a says to use the largest modulus size for
the RSA keys.
10b says to allow SSH version 2 connections
only.
10c says to create and apply a standard ACL
that allows only packets sourced from Office
A’s PCs subnet.
So only PCs in that subnet will be able to
use SSH to configure these devices.
10d says we should only allow SSH connections
to the VTY lines – no Telnet.
E says to require users to log in with a local
user account when connecting via SSH.
And then finally we must configure synchronous
logging on the VTY lines.
So, this is another step where we have to
configure the same thing on all of these devices.
First, let’s go on R1 and walk through each
step.
First, I’ll return to global config mode
with CONF T. To use SSH, we need to create
an RSA key pair.
Let’s do that with CRYPTO KEY GENERATE RSA.
Now it asks for the key modulus size.
This plays a big role in determining the security
of the keys; a larger size is more secure.
The instructions said to use the largest size
available, and as you can see here that is
4096 bits.
So, enter 4096 here and press enter.
Now I’ll use DO SHOW IP SSH to check the
SSH version.
Notice that SSH version 1.99 is enabled. 1.99
isn’t actually a version of SSH.
It just means that R1 accepts both SSH version
1 and version 2 connections.
Let’s change that with IP SSH VERSION 2.
And confirm with DO SHOW IP SSH again.
So, now R1 will only accept SSHv2 connections.
Next, before we configure the VTY lines, let’s
create that ACL that allows only the Office
A PCs subnet.
The subnet is 10.1.0.0/24, so ACCESS-LIST
1 PERMIT 10.1.0.0 0.0.0.255.
And that’s it, we just need that one entry.
The implicit deny will block all other traffic.
Now let’s configure the VTY lines with LINE
VTY 0 15.
First, I’ll apply that ACL.
To apply an ACL to an interface, the command
is IP ACCESS-GROUP, but for the VTY lines
it’s ACCESS-CLASS, then the ACL name or
number, 1 in this case, and IN.
Next, I’ll allow only SSH connections – no
Telnet, since it isn’t secure.
TRANSPORT INPUT SSH.
And let’s require users to log in with a
local user account, just like we configured
on the console line at the beginning of this
lab.
LOGIN LOCAL.
And then enable synchronous logging with LOGGING
SYNCHRONOUS.
Okay, that’s all for R1.
I’ll EXIT back to global config mode.
The other devices require the same commands,
so once again I’ll copy and paste them from
the notepad.
First, generating the keys with CRYPTO KEY
GENERATE RSA, and then 4096 to specify the
modulus size.
Enabling SSH version 2, configuring an ACL
and applying it to the VTY lines.
Allowing only SSH, requiring login with a
local user account, and enabling synchronous
logging.
Let’s copy these commands, and then paste
them into the other devices.
CSW1 first.
Paste in the commands, and EXIT.
Then CSW2.
Right click and paste, and then EXIT.
DSW-A1.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
DSW-A2.
Right click, paste, exit.
DSW-B1.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
And B2.
Right click, paste, exit.
Finally, the access switches, starting with
A1.
Paste the commands, EXIT.
Then A2.
And A3.
Right click, paste, EXIT.
Then ASW-B1.
Paste the commands, EXIT.
And B2.
And finally ASW-B3.
Right click, paste, and EXIT.
Okay, now before moving on let’s test SSH
by connecting to one of the devices.
I’ll go on PC1.
From the command prompt, I’ll try to ping
R1’s loopback.
PING 10.0.0.76.
Okay, PC1 can reach R1.
Now let’s SSH.
SSH -l cisco 10.0.0.76.
Enter the password ‘ccna’, and we’re
in.
So, SSH works from PC1.
Now I’ll EXIT out of there.
Next I’ll try from PC3, let’s open its
command prompt.
Because of the ACL we applied, SSH shouldn’t
work from PC3 – it’s not in the Office
A PCs subnet.
First I’ll just use IPCONFIG /RENEW to make
sure that PC3 got an IP address, since we
just configured DHCP in this part of the lab.
Okay, and next I’ll ping R1 with PING 10.0.0.76.
Okay, the ping works.
Finally, let’s try SSH.
SSH -l cisco 10.0.0.76.
Connection refused by remote host, so the
ACL is working.
That’s all for step 10.
Steps 11 and 12 focus on NAT, Network Address
Translation.
We’ll configure static NAT in step 11, and
then pool-based dynamic PAT in step 12.
So let’s read step 11 first.
It says to configure static NAT on R1 to enable
hosts on the Internet to access SRV1 via the
IP address 203.0.113.113.
So, we just need to configure a static NAT
statement mapping SRV1’s inside local address,
10.5.0.4, to the inside global address 203.0.113.113.
It only takes a single command.
Let’s open up the CLI of R1, and configure
it with IP NAT INSIDE SOURCE STATIC, then
the inside local address, which is 10.5.0.4,
followed by the inside global address, which
is 203.0.113.113.
Now, we’ve configured the static NAT statement,
but there’s still something missing; we
need to specify the inside and outside interfaces.
R1 G0/0/0 and G0/1/0 are connected to the
Internet, so I’ll make them the outside
interfaces.
INTERFACE RANGE g0/0/0 and g0/1/0.
IP NAT OUTSIDE.
And then the inside interfaces are G0/0 and
G0/1, connected to CSW1 and CSW2.
INTERFACE RANGE G0/0-1.
IP NAT INSIDE.
And EXIT.
Okay, so we’ve configured static NAT for
SRV1.
That should allow hosts on the Internet to
communicate with SRV1 by sending their packets
to 203.0.113.113.
It should also allow SRV1 to ping hosts on
the Internet, so let’s test that.
I’ll go back to SRV1, and let’s open up
the command prompt, and then try PING google.com.
Okay, the ping doesn’t work.
Even though SRV1 is a DNS server, we have
to specify itself as its own DNS server in
Packet Tracer.
So go to the config tab, and add 10.5.0.4
as the DNS server here.
This isn’t part of the lab steps by the
way.
I’m just doing it to test.
Next, return to the command prompt, and let’s
try PING google.com again.
Okay, now the ping works.
So, step 11 is done.
In step 12, we’ll configure dynamic PAT,
port address translation, to enable the other
hosts in these LANs to communicate over the
Internet.
We will configure pool-based dynamic NAT,
so we’ll need an ACL to define the appropriate
inside local addresses, a NAT pool to define
a range of inside global addresses, and then
we’ll map them to each other with a NAT
statement.
So, let’s first create the ACL, looking
at step 12a.
It says to use standard ACL 2 to define the
appropriate inside local address ranges in
the following order.
Office A PCs, Office A phones, Office B PCs,
Office B Phones, and then Wi-Fi.
I’ll open the CLI of R1 again, and let’s
make that ACL.
First, I’ll permit the Office A PCs subnet.
ACCESS-LIST 2 PERMIT 10.1.0.0 0.0.0.255.
Then I’ll hit the up arrow, and let’s
change that to 10.2.0.0 for the Office A Phones
subnet.
And then do it again, permitting 10.3.0.0
for the Office B PCs.
And then again, configure 10.4.0.0 for the
Office B Phones.
And finally permit 10.6.0.0/24 for the Wi-Fi
subnet.
So, that ACL defines the range of inside local
addresses that will be translated when communicating
over the Internet.
Now let’s look at step 12b.
We need to define the pool of inside local
addresses – the public IP addresses.
The pool’s name should be POOL1, with a
range from 203.0.113.200 to .207 and a /29
netmask.
So, let’s go back on to R1.
And create the pool with IP NAT POOL POOL1,
and then the starting IP address, 203.0.113.200.
And then the ending IP address, 203.0.113.207.
NETMASK, and then 255.255.255.248 for /29.
Okay, we’ve created the ACL and the pool.
Now let’s do step 12c, which says to map
ACL 2 to POOL1 and enable PAT, and then confirm
that hosts can access the Internet.
So, let’s go back to R1 and configure the
NAT statement.
IP NAT INSIDE SOURCE LIST 2 POOL POOL1, and
then don’t forget OVERLOAD to make it PAT,
instead of regular dynamic NAT.
Okay, the NAT configuration is done, so let’s
test it out on PC1.
From PC1, let’s do PING jeremysitlab.com.
Okay, the ping works.
So, our dynamic PAT configuration was correct.
Now, step 12d says to verify that Internet
link failover works by disabling R1 G0/0/0
and pinging again.
However, note the paragraph here: you will
need to remove and re-configure the DEFAULT-INFORMATION
ORIGINATE command on R1 for this to work.
When R1 loses its primary default route and
inserts the floating default route into the
routing table, it won’t automatically advertise
the new route into OSPF.
As this explanation says, you can use DEFAULT-INFORMATION
ORIGINATE ALWAYS to work around this, but
it’s not available in Packet Tracer.
So, let’s go on R1 now.
I’ll disable its G0/0/0 interface.
INTERFACE G0/0/0.
SHUTDOWN.
Now R1 should remove its main default route
from the routing table, and insert the floating
default route instead.
Next let’s go into OSPF config mode.
ROUTER OSPF 1.
And then use NO DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE
to remove the command, and then reconfigure
it again.
DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE.
So, R1 should now advertise its new default
route to other OSPF routers.
Let’s just double check that the floating
static route actually entered the routing
table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, so down at the bottom of the output
you can see that R1’s default route has
an AD of 2 – this is the floating route
we configured earlier in the lab.
I’ll go on PC1 now and try that ping again.
PING jeremysitlab.com.
And it works again.
So, the failover worked.
Now let’s go back on R1 and undo that.
First, I’ll re-enable G0/0/0.
INTERFACE G0/0/0.
NO SHUTDOWN.
And then configure OSPF.
ROUTER OSPF 1.
NO DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE.
DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE.
And now I’ll EXIT.
Okay, we have one last step before wrapping
up this part of the lab.
In step 13, we’ll disable CDP on all devices
and enable LLDP instead.
We also must disable LLDP Tx, that’s transmission,
on each access switch’s access port, which
is F0/1.
So, since this is a fairly simple step, I’ll
go straight to showing the commands in the
notepad.
On R1, and the core and distribution switches,
we just need to use NO CDP RUN to disable
CDP, and then LLDP RUN to enable LLDP instead.
We’ll use the same commands on the access
switches, but also use NO LLDP TRANSMIT on
each switch’s F0/1 interface.
So, I’ll copy these commands for R1 and
the core and distribution switches.
And let’s go on R1 now.
Right click, paste, and since this is the
final step for this part of the lab I’ll
use DO WRITE to save the config.
Then CSW1.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE.
And CSW2.
DSW-A1.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE.
Then A2.
DSW-B1 next.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE.
And then B2.
Now let’s go back to the notepad and copy
the commands for the access switches, disabling
LLDP transmission on their F0/1 interfaces.
Let’s paste them into ASW-A1 first.
Right click, paste and DO WRITE.
Then A2.
Right click, paste, and DO WRITE.
And A3.
Paste the commands, and save with DO WRITE.
Okay, three more.
On B1, right click, paste, DO WRITE.
ASW-B2.
Paste the commands in, DO WRITE.
And finally, ASW-B3.
Right click, paste, DO WRITE.
Okay, looking at the completion score, you
can see that we’re almost done with this
lab.
There are still three sections remaining,
but they will be shorter than this one.
So, let’s click on Next to move on to part
7.
In part 7, our focus is security.
We’ll configure and apply an extended ACL
to limit traffic from Office A’s PCs to
Office B’s PCs in step 1, and then configure
Port Security, DHCP Snooping, and DAI on the
access switches.
So, let’s get started with step 1.
It says to configure extended ACL OfficeA_to_OfficeB
where appropriate.
It should allow ICMP messages from the Office
A PCs to the Office B PCs, block all other
traffic from the Office A PCs to the Office
B PCs, but permit all other traffic.
Step 1d says to apply the ACL according to
general best practice for extended ACLs.
That general best practice is that extended
ACLs should be applied as close to the source
as possible.
Standard ACLs, on the other hand, should generally
be applied as close to the destination as
possible.
In this case, we are filtering traffic from
Office A’s PCs to Office B’s PCs, so the
source is Office A.
The access switches are layer 2, so we can’t
apply IP ACLs to their interfaces.
So, the closest location to the source is
the VLAN 10 SVI of DSW-A1 and DSW-A2 - the
default gateway for the Office A PCs.
Currently, DSW-A1 is the HSRP active router,
but we should configure and apply the ACL
on DSW-A2’s VLAN 10 SVI as well, since it
must be ready to take over if DSW-A1 fails.
So, let’s configure and apply it on DSW-A1
first, and then we’ll do the same on A2.
First, let’s create the ACL with IP ACCESS-LIST
EXTENDED OfficeA_to_OfficeB.
Now, we need to create three entries.
One to permit ICMP traffic from the Office
A PCs to the Office B PCs, one to deny other
traffic from the Office A PCs to the Office
B PCs, and then one to permit all other traffic.
The Office A PC subnet is 10.1.0.0/24, and
the Office B PC subnet is 10.3.0.0/24.
So, let’s configure the first entry.
PERMIT ICMP 10.1.0.0 0.0.0.255, that’s the
Office A subnet, 10.3.0.0 0.0.0.255, that’s
the Office B subnet.
For the second entry, it’s DENY IP, and
then the same subnets.
10.1.0.0 0.0.0.255 10.3.0.0 0.0.0.255.
And for the final entry, PERMIT IP ANY ANY
to allow all other traffic.
Now let’s apply it as close to the source
as possible, which is the VLAN 10 SVI – the
layer 3 interface that receives packets from
hosts in the Office A PC subnet.
INTERFACE VLAN 10.
IP ACCESS-GROUP OfficeA_to_OfficeB IN.
Okay, that’s all for DSW-A1.
I’ll use EXIT and then DO WRITE to save
the config.
Now I’ll go on DSW-A2 and configure the
same.
So, first create the ACL.
IP ACCESS-LIST EXTENDED OfficeA_to_OfficeB.
Then the first entry, permitting ICMP.
PERMIT ICMP 10.1.0.0 0.0.0.255 10.3.0.0 0.0.0.255.
Then deny other traffic.
DENY IP 10.1.0.0 0.0.0.255 10.3.0.0 0.0.0.255.
And permit all other traffic.
PERMIT IP ANY ANY.
And then apply it to the VLAN 10 SVI.
INTERFACE VLAN 10.
IP ACCESS-GROUP OfficeA_to_OfficeB IN.
Finally, EXIT and DO WRITE.
So, we’re done with step 1.
We created and applied an extended ACL as
close to the source as possible, filtering
traffic from the Office A PC subnet to the
Office B PC subnet.
Now let’s move on to step 2, in which we’ll
configure Port Security on the F0/1 port of
each access switch.
Let’s read the instructions.
2a says to allow the minimum necessary number
of MAC addresses on each port.
For example, for these ports with a phone
and a PC, two MAC addresses are needed: one
for the phone, and one for the PC.
The ports connected to LWAPs only need one
MAC address.
The LWAP tunnels all client traffic, so the
switch should only see the LWAP’s own MAC
address.
And this note mentions that SRV1 doesn’t
use virtualization, so it uses only a single
MAC address.
If it had virtual machines running on it,
each VM would have its own MAC address.
Okay, then step 2b says to configure a violation
mode that blocks invalid traffic without affecting
valid traffic.
And the switches should send notifications,
such as Syslog messages or SNMP traps, when
invalid traffic is detected.
So, that’s referring to the ‘restrict’
violation mode.
Finally, 2c says that switches should automatically
save the secure MAC addresses they learn to
the running-config.
In other words, we must enable sticky MAC
address learning.
So, let’s configure ASW-A1 manually and
then copy and paste the commands for the others.
Port Security is configured directly on the
interface, so INTERFACE F0/1.
First, enable it with SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY.
And then enable the ‘restrict’ violation
mode with SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY VIOLATION
RESTRICT.
And finally, enable sticky MAC address learning
with SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY MAC-ADDRESS
STICKY.
Okay, that’s all for ASW-A1.
I’ll EXIT to return to global config mode.
ASW-B1 and ASW-B3 also need the same commands.
So, I’ll go to the notepad, and here are
the commands.
Highlight and copy them, and then I’ll open
the CLI of ASW-B1 and paste them.
And then EXIT.
Then ASW-B3.
Paste the commands in, and EXIT.
Now let’s configure ASW-A2, A3, and B2.
They require an additional command.
Let’s open up the notepad again.
Because these switches connect to a phone
and a PC, we need to use the SWITCHPORT PORT-SECURITY
MAXIMUM 2 command to allow two MAC addresses:
the PC’s MAC address and the phone’s MAC
address.
I didn’t configure this command on ASW-A1,
B1, or B3, because the default number of allowed
addresses is 1, and that’s all that’s
needed on those ports.
So, I’ll highlight and copy these commands,
and now go on to ASW-A2 and paste them in.
And then EXIT.
Then ASW-A3.
Paste the commands, and EXIT.
And ASW-B2.
Okay, we’ve enabled Port Security on the
access switches, allowed the minimum necessary
number of MAC addresses, and configured the
restrict violation mode and sticky learning.
Now let’s move on to step 3, in which we’ll
configure DHCP Snooping on these switches.
There are a few requirements.
3a says to enable DHCP Snooping for all active
VLANs in each LAN.
So, VLANs 10, 20, 40, and 99 in Office A,
and VLANs 10, 20, 30, and 99 in Office B.
Then, we must trust the appropriate ports,
which are those pointing toward the DHCP server,
R1.
In other words, we must trust the G0/1 and
G0/2 uplinks that connect to the distribution
layer.
Then, in 3c we must disable insertion of option
82, also known as the relay agent information
option.
Then, we’ll set a DHCP rate limit of 15
pps, packets per second, on untrusted ports.
However, ASW-A1’s connection to WLC1 should
have a 100 pps limit.
Once again, I’ll manually configure ASW-A1
and then paste the configurations for the
other switches.
So, on ASW-A1 I’ll first enable DHCP Snooping
with IP DHCP SNOOPING.
However, we also need to enable it on a per-VLAN
basis, and the command is IP DHCP SNOOPING
VLAN 10,20,40,99.
Next, I’ll disable option 82 insertion with
NO IP DHCP SNOOPING INFORMATION OPTION.
That’s a step that people often forget;
it can prevent DHCP from working properly.
Okay, next I’ll trust the uplinks to the
distribution layer.
INTERFACE RANGE G0/1-2.
IP DHCP SNOOPING TRUST.
Next, let’s set rate limits for DHCP messages
on untrusted ports.
F0/1 first.
INTERFACE F0/1.
IP DHCP SNOOPING LIMIT RATE 15.
So, if ASW-A1 receives DHCP messages on this
interface at a rate greater than 15 packets
per second, the interface will be error-disabled.
And now F0/2, which is connected to WLC1.
INTERFACE F0/2.
IP DHCP SNOOPING LIMIT RATE 100.
Okay, that’s all.
EXIT.
Now let’s open the notepad and see the configurations
for the other switches.
I’ll highlight and copy the commands for
ASW-A2 and A3.
They are the same as A1, minus the F0/2 interface,
which is disabled on these two switches.
Okay, I’ll paste these commands into ASW-A2.
And then return to global config mode with
EXIT.
Next, ASW-A3.
Right click, paste, and EXIT.
Okay, let’s return to the notepad for the
Office B switches.
The commands here are almost identical, just
replacing VLAN 40 with VLAN 30, the Servers
VLAN.
So, after copying these commands, let’s
paste them into ASW-B1.
And then EXIT.
Then B2.
EXIT.
And finally, B3.
Okay, step 3 is done, now let’s move on
to step 4, in which we’ll configure DAI,
Dynamic ARP Inspection.
We need to enable it for all active VLANs,
trust the appropriate ports, and enable all
optional validation checks.
Once again, let’s configure ASW-A1 first.
Unlike DHCP Snooping, DAI only needs to be
enabled per-VLAN.
You don’t need to enable it globally.
So, first I’ll use IP ARP INSPECTION VLAN
10,20,40,99 to enable it.
Next, let’s enable the optional checks.
Usually, DAI checks to make sure a matching
entry exists in the DHCP Snooping binding
table.
But you can enable these checks to make it
perform a more thorough inspection of ARP
messages.
The command is IP ARP INSPECTION DST-MAC SRC-MAC
IP.
And finally, I’ll trust the two uplink ports.
INTERFACE RANGE G0/1-2.
IP ARP INSPECTION TRUST.
Okay, that’s all.
I’ll use EXIT and then save with DO WRITE
since this is the last step for this part.
Now I’ll open up the notepad and go to part
7 step 4.
So, here are the commands we just configured
on ASW-A1.
I’ll copy them, and then let’s paste them
into ASW-A2 and A3.
A2 first.
Paste the commands.
EXIT, and save with DO WRITE.
Then A3.
Paste the commands.
EXIT, and DO WRITE.
Now let’s go back to the notepad, and copy
the commands for Office B.
The commands are the same, just replacing
VLAN 40 with VLAN 30.
Enable DAI on each VLAN, enable the optional
checks, and then trust G0/1 and 2.
So, I’ll go on ASW-B1 first and paste the
commands in.
And then EXIT and save the config with DO
WRITE.
Then B2.
Copy the commands, EXIT and DO WRITE.
And finally, B3.
Copy the commands, EXIT, and DO WRITE.
Okay, we’re done with the security section
of this lab.
We configured and applied an extended ACL,
and then configured the layer-2 security features
Port Security, DHCP Snooping, and Dynamic
ARP Inspection.
I’ll click Next to move on to part 8.
Part 8 is all about IPv6.
However, we’re not going to do a full IPv6
configuration, just some IP addresses on R1,
CSW1, and CSW2, and a couple of routes on
R1.
Since this lab is already long enough, let’s
just test that you know the basic IPv6 configuration
commands for the CCNA exam.
So, in step 1 we’ll enable IPv6 routing
and configure IPv6 addresses on R1, CSW1,
and CSW2.
On R1 G0/0/0, which is connected to the Internet,
we’ll configure 2001:db8:a::2/64, and then
:b::2/64 on G0/1/0, which is also connected
to the Internet.
Then, for the connections between R1 and the
core switches, we’ll use these specified
prefixes, 2001:db8:a1::/64 and a2::/64, and
use EUI-64 to automatically generate interface
IDs.
Finally, for the EtherChannel connection between
CSW1 and CSW2, we’ll enable IPv6 on the
interfaces without using the IPV6 ADDRESS
command.
In other words, we’ll use the IPV6 ENABLE
command, which enables IPv6 and generates
a link-local address.
Okay, let’s get started by configuring R1.
Now, before configuring the interfaces, don’t
forget to enable IPv6 routing with IPV6 UNICAST-ROUTING.
That’s a common command to forget.
Now I’ll configure G0/0/0, connected to
the Internet.
INTERFACE G0/0/0.
IPV6 ADDRESS 2001:db8:a::2/64.
And then G0/1/0.
INTERFACE G0/1/0.
IPV6 ADDRESS 2001:db8:b::2/64.
Okay, we’ve configured R1’s Internet-connected
interfaces, now let’s do the LAN-facing
interfaces.
Looking back at the instructions again, I
need to use this prefix with EUI-64 for G0/0,
and this prefix for G0/1.
Let’s return to the CLI and do that.
INTERFACE G0/0.
IPV6 ADDRESS 2001:db8:a1::/64 EUI-64.
And then G0/1.
INTERFACE G0/1.
IPV6 ADDRESS 2001:db8:a2::/64 EUI-64.
Alright, we’ve configured R1’s interfaces.
Now let’s quickly confirm with DO SHOW IPV6
INTERFACE BRIEF.
Okay, there are the four interfaces we just
configured, each with a link-local address
as well as the global unicast address we configured.
Now let’s configure CSW1 and CSW2’s G1/0/1
interfaces.
For both of them, we’ll use EUI-64 just
like we did on R1.
I’ll go on CSW1 first.
Before configuring the IP address, let’s
use IPV6 UNICAST-ROUTING to enable IPv6 routing.
You should make a habit of configuring that
first so you don’t forget.
Next, INTERFACE G1/0/1.
IPV6 ADDRESS 2001:db8:a1::/64 EUI-64.
Okay, that’s CSW1.
Next I’ll go on CSW2.
First, enable IPv6 routing.
IPV6 UNICAST-ROUTING.
And then configure the interface.
INTERFACE G1/0/1.
IPV6 ADDRESS 2001:db8:a2::/64 EUI-64.
Okay, finally let’s do the EtherChannel
between CSW1 and CSW2.
Since I’m already on CSW2, I’ll start
here.
INTERFACE PORT-CHANNEL1.
The instructions said to enable IPv6 without
using the IPV6 ADDRESS command, so the command
to use here is IPV6 ENABLE.
Let’s verify the effect of that command.
DO SHOW IPV6 INTERFACE BRIEF.
So, look at the port-channel1 interface.
Enabling IPv6 with IPV6 ENABLE automatically
generates a link-local address like this.
Okay, now I’ll save the config with DO WRITE
since this was the last configuration on CSW2.
And now I’ll go on to CSW1.
INTERFACE PORT-CHANNEL1.
IPV6 ENABLE.
And then save the config.
DO WRITE.
So, step 1 is done.
We configured IPv6 addresses in three different
ways: configuring the exact address, configuring
a /64 prefix and using EUI-64, and then using
IPV6 ENABLE.
Now in step 2, we’ll configure two default
static routes on R1, pointing to the Internet.
We’ll configure a recursive static route
via next hop 2001:db8:a::1, the ISP connected
to G0/0/0.
And then a fully-specified route via next
hop 2001:db8:b::1, the ISP connected to G0/1/0.
This second route should be a floating route,
with an AD 1 higher than the default.
Okay, let’s return to R1 to configure those
routes.
The instructions say the first route should
be a recursive route, meaning it should only
specify the next-hop IP address.
So, IPV6 ROUTE ::/0, that’s equivalent to
0.0.0.0/0 in IPv4, and then the next hop is
2001:db8:a::1.
Now the next route, which must be fully specified,
meaning it should specify both the exit interface
and the next-hop IP address.
It should also be a floating route.
So, IPV6 ROUTE ::/0 G0/1/0 2001:db8:b::1,
and then set the AD to 2 to make it a floating
route.
Okay that’s it, let’s save with DO WRITE.
And that’s all for part 8.
We configured IPv6 addresses on R1, CSW1,
and CSW2, and then configured a couple of
default routes on R1.
I’ll click next to move on to part 9.
Finally, we’ve reached last part of this
lab, in which we’ll configure a wireless
LAN using the GUI of WLC1.
Let’s take a look at the steps.
First, of course, we have to access the GUI
of WLC1, which has the IP address 10.0.0.7.
The login is admin with the password adminPW12.
In step 2 we’ll create a dynamic interface
for the Wi-Fi WLAN.
Then in step 3 create a wireless LAN.
And then finally we’ll verify that both
LWAPs have associated with WLC1.
There’s also a note saying that, due to
packet tracer’s limitations, wireless clients
won’t be able to properly lease an IP address
from the Wi-Fi DHCP pool.
In my experience, they always lease an IP
address from the management DHCP pool in Packet
Tracer.
Don’t worry about it – it’s just an
issue with packet tracer.
So, let’s get started.
I’ll access WLC1 from PC1.
First I’ll open up the command prompt and
ping WLC1 just to make sure PC1 can reach
it.
PING 10.0.0.7.
This should also ensure that all devices have
the correct ARP entries – it can be quite
slow in packet tracer.
Okay, next I’m going to leave the command
prompt and open up PC1’s web browser.
It can take a few seconds.
Once the browser opens up, use HTTPS to access
WLC1 by typing in the address bar.
HTTPS://10.0.0.7.
Here’s the login screen.
Click on Login, and then enter the username
admin and the password adminPW12.
Okay, we’re in.
Now let’s look closer at step 2.
We need to configure a dynamic interface for
the Wi-Fi WLAN, which is 10.6.0.0/24.
The name should simply be Wi-Fi, with VLAN
number 40.
It should use port number 1 on WLC1, its IP
address should be .2 of its subnet and default
gateway .1.
Finally, its DHCP server should be 10.0.0.76.
Okay, let’s configure that on WLC1.
To configure the WLC’s interfaces, open
the CONTROLLER tab.
Once it loads, click on Interfaces on the
left.
By default, the WLC has two interfaces: the
management interface and the virtual interface.
Let’s create a dynamic interface.
Scroll to the right of this page and click
on “New…”.
The first menu has the interface name and
VLAN ID.
So, let’s name the interface Wi-Fi, and
set the VLAN to 40.
Then, click Apply to move to the next menu.
We need to configure a few things here.
Scroll down to Physical Information and set
the port number to 1.
Then, under Interface Address set the IP to
10.6.0.2, the netmask to 255.255.255.0, and
the gateway to 10.6.0.1.
Finally, set the primary DHCP server to 10.0.0.76,
R1’s loopback interface.
Okay, that’s it.
Scroll up and click apply, and then click
Okay on the popup.
And we’re done.
I’ll click on Interfaces again to go back
to the list of interfaces, and as you can
see in the list, the interface has been created.
Next, let’s look at step 3.
We need to create a WLAN with the name and
SSID Wi-Fi, and ID number of 1.
We need to enable it, and set WPA2 with AES
encryption, and a pre shared key of cisco123.
Okay, let’s go back to WLC1 and configure
it.
WLANs are configured from the WLAN tab, of
course.
To create a new WLAN, just click on Go here
on the right.
In the first menu, we can set the profile
name, SSID and ID number.
Both of these should simply be Wi-Fi, and
the ID should be 1, so we don’t have to
change that.
Okay, click on Apply to move on to the next
screen.
On this next page, we need to configure a
couple of things.
First, click the checkbox here to enable the
WLAN.
Then, we should configure the interface; this
WLAN should use the Wi-Fi interface, not the
management interface.
Okay, after configuring that, click on the
Security tab.
Let’s enable WPA2.
From the layer 2 security drop-down, select
WPA+WPA2.
Then click on WPA2 policy.
For the encryption, AES is selected by default,
so we don’t have to change that.
Then click on PSK to enable pre-shared key
authentication.
And configure the PSK as cisco123.
And that’s it.
There are additional tabs here, but we don’t
have to configure them for this lab.
Most of the remaining settings don’t work
in packet tracer, anyway.
So, just click on apply in the top right to
apply the settings.
All configurations are done!
I’ll just click on Save Configuration to
save them.
After saving the configurations, click on
MONITOR to return to the first screen.
If you scroll down, you can see the access
points associated with WLC1.
There should be two: LWAP1 and LWAP2.
Click here to see a list, and here they are.
Okay, I’ll do one more thing before finishing
up.
Let’s open up Laptop1.
From the Config tab, click on the Wireless0
interface.
Let’s make it associate with LWAP1.
So, specify the SSID ‘Wi-Fi’ that we just
configured.
Under authentication, click on WPA2-PSK and
enter the PSK ‘cisco123’.
Finally, select the correct encryption type:
AES.
After a few seconds, Laptop 1 should associate
with LWAP1.
However, look back at the note under step
4 in the instructions once more.
Wireless clients won’t be able to lease
an IP address from the Wi-Fi DHCP pool.
The Wi-Fi subnet is 10.6.0.0/24.
But look at the IP address Laptop1 leased:
it’s in the 10.0.0.0/28 subnet: the Office
A management subnet.
But as I said, don’t worry about it.
The configurations we did here are correct.
It’s just a problem with packet tracer.
So, we’re finally done.
As the completion score of 100% here shows,
we did all of the steps correctly.
To be honest, if you’re studying for the
CCNA exam, I’d be surprised if you got 100%
on the first attempt – this is a huge lab
so you will most likely get a few things wrong.
If your score isn’t 100%, click on Check
Results and then assessment items, and then
click on ‘show incorrect items’.
This will show you which commands you got
wrong, so you can go back and fix them.
Okay, this video has gone on long enough,
so let’s end it here.
This was the Jeremy’s IT Lab CCNA Mega Lab.
I hope this lab and video were both challenging
and helpful.
Thanks for watching.